# GutGard®| Licorice Root Extract for Gut Health | Natural Remedies
URL: https://naturalremedieshumanhealth.com/gutgard/

GutGard®| Licorice Root Extract for Gut Health | Natural Remedies

Development

Digestive disturbances are affecting more individuals than ever, largely due to stress and dietary habits (eg: nutritionally lacking, as well as eating quickly, on the run). These factors combine to create a host of issues such as gas and bloating, acid reflux/heartburn, stomach griping, flatulence, diarrhea, cramps, and constipation. And, poor digestion leads to lack of energy, poor sleep, and overall malaise. Upper digestive ailments are also often caused by a bacterial infection, chiefly, Helicobacter pylori.

Over-the-counter remedies may work to reduce symptom severity, and prescriptions meant to take daily, regulate over-enthusiastic proton pumps in the stomach that eject the acid.

For Daily Digestive Health

 GutGard ® is a clinically researched, flavonoid-rich, natural bioactive for daily digestive health derived from Glycyrrhiza glabra. GutGard® is standardized to >3.5% glabridin and >10% total flavonoids with glycyrrhizin level to be made <0.5%

GutGard ® is the only of its class to offer the advantage of the cache of flavonoids found in licorice. More than 50 flavonoids including isoflavans (glabridin), Isoflavones (example: licoflavone A), Isoflavanones (example: glabrol), chalcones (example: isoliquiritigenin), etc, have been identified in GutGard ® by using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Batch to batch consistency of the flavonoid profile is monitored with the help of high-performance liquid chromatography. 

Traditional uses

 Licorice has a long, rich use in cultures worldwide; it was even found in the tomb of King Tutankhamun. The dried root of licorice has been used by not only the Egyptians but throughout the populations and cultures of Asia and the Mediterranean regions. The Romans relied on it for numerous ailments. Licorice is recorded in the pharmacopoeias of nations throughout the world.

In the first century AD, the Greek physician Dioscorides used licorice to treat people with stomach and intestinal ulcers (it is known now that many ulcers are caused by Helicobacter pylori). 

About GutGard®

Clinically researched flavonoid rich liquorice extract that support GLP & Modern Digestive Challenges.

Modern Challenges

Addressing rising digestive issues cause by diet, protein intake, including heartburn, bloating and H-Pylori Management.

Uncompromising Safety

GutGard® is safe for long-term daily use with negligible glycyrrhizin levels (below 0.5%), ensuring digestive relief without side effects or hypertension risks.

Botanical Precision

Flavonoid-rich extract standardized to 10% Total Flavonoids, 3.5% Glabridin and with safety-first glycyrrhizin levels below 0.5%.

Mechanism of Action

Acts by Enhancing Microbiome modulation, Protecting gastric mucosa and managing H-Pylori activity.

 Clinical Efficacy Real-world human outcomes 

 Safety & Tolerability Clinically validated safety 

 Preclinical Studies Validated mechanisms & cellular