Monk Fruit Powder
        – Matakana Superfoods Enjoy free shipping on all orders over $100* Shop Subscribe & Save Learn About Wholesale Login NZD AFN AUD NZD GBP USD Confirm Shop By Category Shop By Type Shop By Need New Arrivals Best Sellers Bundle & Save Sale Shop All Products Nutrition & Wellness Pantry Essentials Superfoods Powders & Smoothies Protein Powders Breakfast Kids Pets Everyday Essentials Snacks Cacao Coconut Hemp Keto Sauces & Oils Superfoods for Kids Shop Now Supplements Antioxidants Vitamins & Minerals Probiotics Protein Powders Functional Mushrooms Shop All Supplements Targeted Wellness Beauty Collagen Immune Support Metabolic & Cellular Value Packs Premium Supplements Shop Now Focus Gut Sleep Immune System Joint Support Heart Brain Skin, Hair, Nails Libido Eyes/Vision Stress/Mood/Hormones Goals Energy Healthy Ageing Weight Management Sports Performance & Nutrition Diet Organic Dairy Free Gluten Free Keto NZ Ingredients Protein Our Best Sellers Super Reds Plant Protein + Collagen Hyaluronic Acid Matcha Powder Marine Collagen Vit D3 K2 MK7 Shop All Best Sellers SuperGreens Shop now Marine Collagen Shop now Bundles Daily Vitality Pack For the Wellness Guru Healthy Ageing Pack The Ultimate Monster Pack Shop All Bundles Daily Vitality Pack Shop now Ultimate Monster Pack Shop now Store Sales Sale Items View all recipes View all articles Energising Caramel Slice with Mama Read More What Would You Do to Reduce Your Risk of Death by 42%? Read More Delicious Hemp Flour Cookie Read More Search for products or categories Shop Shop By Category Nutrition & Wellness Pantry Essentials Superfoods Powders & Smoothies Protein Powders Breakfast Kids Pets Everyday Essentials Snacks Cacao Coconut Hemp Keto Sauces & Oils Superfoods for Kids Shop Now Shop By Type Supplements Antioxidants Vitamins & Minerals Probiotics Protein Powders Functional Mushrooms Shop All Supplements Targeted Wellness Beauty Collagen Immune Support Metabolic & Cellular Value Packs Premium Supplements Shop Now Shop By Need Focus Gut Sleep Immune System Joint Support Heart Brain Skin, Hair, Nails Libido Eyes/Vision Stress/Mood/Hormones Goals Energy Healthy Ageing Weight Management Sports Performance & Nutrition Diet Organic Dairy Free Gluten Free Keto NZ Ingredients Protein New Arrivals Best Sellers Our Best Sellers Super Reds Plant Protein + Collagen Hyaluronic Acid Matcha Powder Marine Collagen Vit D3 K2 MK7 Shop All Best Sellers SuperGreens Shop now Marine Collagen Shop now Bundle & Save Bundles Daily Vitality Pack For the Wellness Guru Healthy Ageing Pack The Ultimate Monster Pack Shop All Bundles Daily Vitality Pack Shop now Ultimate Monster Pack Shop now Sale Store Sales Sale Items Shop All Products Subscribe & Save Learn View all recipes View all articles Energising Caramel Slice with Mama Read More What Would You Do to Reduce Your Risk of Death by 42%? Read More Delicious Hemp Flour Cookie Read More About Wholesale Login Contact Us Shipping & Returns NZD AFN AUD NZD GBP USD Confirm Shop / Everyday Essentials / Superfoods Powders & Smoothies Monk Fruit Powder 3 reviews Table Sugar Alternative Natural Sweetener Our Monk Fruit powder is a natural sweetener and sugar substitute. It's a great product for those looking to reduce their sugar intake. $29.99 100g 1kg - + Add to Cart - $29.99 This product is sold out Afterpay PayPal Apple Pay Amex Mastercard VISA Shop App Product Description Monk fruit (also known as Luo Han Guo), is a lemon-sized gourd that was first cultivated by Chinese Buddhist monks in the 13th century. Monk Fruit's sweetness comes mainly from a unique, natural compound called mogroside. This makes monk fruit juice powder an excellent sweetener and natural sugar substitute - perfect for those requiring less sugar in their diet. How to Take Serving Suggestion Use to sweeten smoothies, beverages, sauces and baking. Caution Ingredients do not contain gluten, but are packed in a facility that may handle products containing gluten, nuts, and sesame seeds. Storage Reseal pouch. Store in a cool dry place. Ingredients Monk fruit extract 90% (standardised to a minimum of 7% mogrosides), maltodextrin 10% (from non-GMO corn). No colourings or preservatives. GM free. Serving Size: 1g Serving Per Pack: 100 Avg. Qty./Serving Avg. Qty./100g Energy 14.1kj 1410kj Protein 0.082g 8.2g Fat, total 0.0g Less than 1g - saturated 0.0g Less than 1g Carbohydrate 0.588g 58.8g - sugars 0.057g 5.7g Dietary Fibre 0.133g 13.3g Sodium 0.13mg 13mg Purchase $29.99 100g 1kg - + Add to Cart - $29.99 This product is sold out Afterpay PayPal Apple Pay Amex Mastercard VISA Shop App Product Description Monk fruit (also known as Luo Han Guo), is a lemon-sized gourd that was first cultivated by Chinese Buddhist monks in the 13th century. Monk Fruit's sweetness comes mainly from a unique, natural compound called mogroside. This makes monk fruit juice powder an excellent sweetener and natural sugar substitute - perfect for those requiring less sugar in their diet. How to Take Serving Suggestion Use to sweeten smoothies, beverages, sauces and baking. Caution Ingredients do not contain gluten, but are packed in a facility that may handle products containing gluten, nuts, and sesame seeds. Storage Reseal pouch. Store in a cool dry place. Ingredients Monk fruit extract 90% (standardised to a minimum of 7% mogrosides), maltodextrin 10% (from non-GMO corn). No colourings or preservatives. GM free. Serving Size: 1g Serving Per Pack: 100 Avg. Qty./Serving Avg. Qty./100g Energy 14.1kj 1410kj Protein 0.082g 8.2g Fat, total 0.0g Less than 1g - saturated 0.0g Less than 1g Carbohydrate 0.588g 58.8g - sugars 0.057g 5.7g Dietary Fibre 0.133g 13.3g Sodium 0.13mg 13mg Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Dairy Free Gluten Free Vegan Heavy Metals Tested Natural Sweetener Monk Fruit Powder $29.99 100g 1kg - + Add to Cart Product Description Monk fruit (also known as Luo Han Guo), is a lemon-sized gourd that was first cultivated by Chinese Buddhist monks in the 13th century. Monk Fruit's sweetness comes mainly from a unique, natural compound called mogroside. This makes monk fruit juice powder an excellent sweetener and natural sugar substitute - perfect for those requiring less sugar in their diet. Ingredients Monk fruit extract 90% (standardised to a minimum of 7% mogrosides), maltodextrin 10% (from non-GMO corn). No colourings or preservatives. GM free. Serving Size: 1g Serving Per Pack: 100 Avg. Qty./Serving Avg. Qty./100g Energy 14.1kj 1410kj Protein 0.082g 8.2g Fat, total 0.0g Less than 1g - saturated 0.0g Less than 1g Carbohydrate 0.588g 58.8g - sugars 0.057g 5.7g Dietary Fibre 0.133g 13.3g Sodium 0.13mg 13mg View full ingredients View less ingredients How to Take Serving Suggestion Use to sweeten smoothies, beverages, sauces and baking. Caution Ingredients do not contain gluten, but are packed in a facility that may handle products containing gluten, nuts, and sesame seeds. Storage Reseal pouch. Store in a cool dry place. The Matakana Difference Quality We source the highest-quality ingredients for you and your family’s wellbeing. The vast majority of our wholefoods are also certified-organic by AsureQuality. Expertise We have decades worth of experience in the health food industry and are here to help you on your wellness journey. Wellness We believe nourishing your body with the clean nutrition it thrives on, is fundamental not only to your physical health, but also to the health of your mind and overall wellbeing. Trusted by Experts & Athletes UFC Heavyweight Brando Peričić @balknbear As an active heavyweight in the UFC, I'm training two to three sessions per day, six days a week. For my recovery, it's essential I'm fuelling my body with the premium nutrition it needs - Matakana Superfoods have that covered for me. Registered Nutritionist Danijela Armitage @nourishandtempt The quality and diversity of Matakana Superfoods product range has really impressed me. As a registered nutritionist, I appreciate their emphasis on premium, organic wholefoods and thoughtfully sourced ingredients. FAQ's Your pouches aren't biodegradable. Why? Many of our products contain super nutrients like polyphenols and other phytonutrients. To ensure these nutrients are retained, we use premium, multi-layered, fully-lined metallised foil pouches. The internal compartment is lined with food grade plastic, so no metal or aluminium component comes into contact with the food.
Although biodegradable pouches may seem like the more environmentally friendly option, they're more porous and allow the food and powders to come into contact with degrading factors such as oxygen and moisture, therefore reducing the potency, quality and shelf life of the product. Anything other than fully metalized triple laminated foil is prone to early degradation. We also endeavour to avoid using single serve sachets due to packaging wastage and high carbon footprint. Are your products tested? Testing & product specification parameters differ depending on the type of ingredient. If you'd like to see specifications or test results for a certain product please email hello@matakanasuperfoods.com. Customer Reviews Related Products Customer Reviews Based on 3 reviews Write a review 67% (2) 33% (1) 0% (0) 0% (0) 0% (0) D Dr G. MONKFRUIT juice powder I recommend this especially as it tastes great, far better than stevia and has no bad side effects Dr Georgia T T.B. Love this product Great product, taste good, just what i need. R Robyn S. Great Sugar Subsitute Best tasting sugar subsitute I have used, and a little goes a long way. Great that there is no erythritol in it. Matakana Superfoods is on a mission to make healthy living and personal wellness easy and accessible to everyone. We’ve been providing sustainably sourced, organic products to NZ and the world since 2009. Lets keep in touch Sign-up for 15% off your first online order Shop Our Story Blog My Account Subscriptions Loyalty Shipping & Returns Contact Us Instagram Facebook Pinterest Matakana Superfoods 2026 © Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Website by Ghost Street Select Frequency Update Your Cart Your order qualifies for free NZ shipping You are away from free NZ shipping Your Cart is currently empty Shop All $0.00 Checkout - $0.00 View Cart Remove Subscription Remove - + Subscription details How subscriptions work Products are automatically delivered on your schedule. No obligation, modify or cancel your subscription anytime. Powered by Remove Subscription Upgrade to Subscription & save New Zealand Orders All New Zealand orders over NZ$100 qualify for free shipping . Order values under $100 incur a flat shipping fee country-wide of NZ$9.50 (no extra charge for Rural Delivery). Depending on the time of day your order is placed, we strive to have your order dispatched within 1- 3 working days .  Please note that this period may be extended during statutory holidays and over the Christmas/New Year period. Australian Orders All Australian orders over AUD $ 100.00 qualify for free shipping . Order values under AUD$100 incur a flat shipping fee of $15 . Expected dispatch time is 1-3 working days unless there are issues beyond our control. Orders are shipped via DHL or AusPost. UK Orders All UK orders are shipped via DHL with a flat shipping fee of £17.50 . UK customers please note that we are unable to ship overs over £135 (including the price of shipping), so please keep the value of your cart to £85 or less to avoid issues. Expected dispatch time is 1-3 working days unless there are issues beyond our control. Orders are shipped via DHL or AU Post. Expected delivery time is 5-10 working days from date of order. International Orders Middle East tracked NZ$45.00. Philippines tracked NZ$40.00. Rest of the world tracked NZ$35.00. International orders are shipped via DHL. Expected delivery time is 5-10 working days for most destinations, however, it can be 10-14 working days for more remote locations. We also reserve the right to charge additional shipping fees depending on the weight, volume and delivery location for your order. We will contact you to confirm shipping costs before processing your order if this is the case. UK and International orders may attract local customs taxes or duties on arrival to your country. These taxes/duties are required to be paid by the purchaser and are not the responsibility of Matakana Superfoods. No refunds will be issued for orders where tax/duties remain unpaid by the purchaser. Please check with your local customs agency regarding the tax/duty likely to be charged prior to ordering. EU Consumer Right of Withdrawal Customers in the European Union If you are a consumer residing in the European Union, you may have a statutory right to withdraw from your purchase within 14 days of receiving your order, without giving any reason, unless an exception under applicable law applies. To exercise your right of withdrawal, you must notify us of your decision before the withdrawal period expires. You may do so by using our online withdrawal function (where available) or by contacting us using the details provided on our Contact Us page. Once your withdrawal request has been received, we will provide confirmation of receipt without undue delay. You must return the goods to us in saleable condition within 14 days of notifying us of your decision to withdraw. Unless the return is due to our error or the goods are faulty, you are responsible for the cost of returning goods to us. We will refund all payments received for the returned goods, including the standard cost of delivery where required by applicable law, within the timeframes required by EU consumer law. We may withhold the refund until we have received the returned goods in saleable condition, or satisfactory evidence that they have been returned. If the returned goods incur any customs duties, import taxes, brokerage fees, storage charges, handling fees, or other charges imposed by customs authorities or the shipping carrier upon their return to us, these amounts will be deducted from your refund. Where such charges exceed the value of the refund, we reserve the right to reduce the refund accordingly. We are not responsible for customs duties, taxes, VAT, or other import charges levied by your local customs authority on either the original shipment or the return of the goods. Exceptions For health, hygiene and food safety reasons, the right of withdrawal does not apply where permitted by applicable law, including but not limited to: Products that have been opened or unsealed after delivery and are not suitable for return due to health protection or hygiene reasons. Perishable goods or products liable to deteriorate or expire rapidly. Any other products excluded from the right of withdrawal under applicable EU consumer protection legislation. Nothing in these Terms & Conditions limits or excludes any statutory consumer rights that cannot legally be excluded. Shipping Terms & Conditions Matakana Superfoods is open 5 days a week, Mon-Fri. All orders placed over the weekend will be processed the next working day. When you place an order you have the opportunity to state instructions for the courier to leave the parcel somewhere on your property. Please note that you do this at your own risk and there is no way to claim your goods should they not arrive, or are stolen. Once your order has been processed and dispatched from our website we are unable to intercept the parcel, so please ensure the contents of your order are correct at purchase and that the correct address and delivery details have been included at checkout. Cancellation, Return and Refund Policy We hope that you are happy with your purchase but should you wish to return any item to us, we will be happy to refund or replace a product subject to the following conditions: We will provide a full refund or replacement (at your election) if the quality of goods delivered is unacceptable (we may request photographic proof). This is on the condition that you contact us within 24 hours of receiving the goods either by phone or by emailing orders@matakanasuperfoods.com . We recommend you check the contents of your parcel prior to signing the courier. Before returning any goods, the customer must contact Matakana Superfoods by phone or email (to be obtained from the website). We do not accept cancellations once your order has been handed to our courier for delivery. We do not provide refunds for change-of-mind returns. All eligible refund requests will be processed within 30 days. Subject to the terms above, we are happy to refund or replace any item requested within 20 days of placing your order. If you believe your order has been lost in transit, you must contact us within 20 days of placing your order to be eligible for a refund or replacement. Matakana SuperFoods Limited is committed to protecting your privacy as an online visitor to our website. We use the information we collect about you to maximize the services that we provide to you. You may change your details at any time by advising us. Matakana SuperFoods Limited is dedicated to keeping your details private. Any information, we collect in relation to you, is kept strictly secured. We do not pass on/sell/swap any of your personal details with anyone. We use this information to identify your orders, provide you with our newsletters (if applicable) and to personalise your shopping experience with us. Each individual using our website is also responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of their user ID. However, in the event of any unauthorized use of your user ID or any other information, we request that you immediately notify us. We will do our best to provide assistance and prevent further unauthorized use. We use Klaviyo as our marketing platform. By subscribing to our emailing list, you acknowledge that your information will be transferred to Klaviyo for processing. Learn more about Klaviyo's privacy practices here. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link in the footer of our emails or by contacting us at info@matakanasuperfoods.com. Individual profile and company details are not used for any other purpose. Details are only supplied to a third party supplier when it is required by law, for goods or services which you have purchased or to protect Matakana SuperFoods Limited copyright, trademarks and other legal rights. Terms & Conditions Welcome to matakanasuperfoods.com. Please read these Terms & Conditions of use carefully before using our website. If you continue to browse and use this website you are agreeing to comply with and be bound by the following terms and conditions of use. Amendment of Terms We may change these Terms & Conditions at any time. Each time you use matakanasuperfoods.com you are agreeing to the terms and conditions applicable at that time. We provide a link to these Terms & Conditions at the bottom of every page of the website. International shoppers Import duties, taxes, and charges are not included in the item price or shipping cost. These charges are the buyer's responsibility. Please check with your country's customs office to determine what these additional costs will be prior to buying. Privacy Policy Matakana Superfoods Limited is committed to protecting your privacy as an online visitor to our website. We use the information we collect about you to maximize the services that we provide to you. You may change your details at any time by advising us. Matakana Superfoods Limited is dedicated to keeping your details private. Any information, we collect in relation to you, is kept strictly secured. We do not pass on/sell/swap any of your personal details with anyone. We use this information to identify your orders, provide you with our newsletters (if applicable) and to personalise your shopping experience with us. Each individual using our website is also responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of their user ID. However, in the event of any unauthorized use of your user ID or any other information, we request that you immediately notify us. We will do our best to provide assistance and prevent further unauthorized use. We use Klaviyo as our marketing platform. By subscribing to our emailing list, you acknowledge that your information will be transferred to Klaviyo for processing. Learn more about Klaviyo's privacy practices here. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link in the footer of our emails or by contacting us at info@matakanasuperfoods.com. Individual profile and company details are not used for any other purpose. Details are only supplied to a third party supplier when it is required by law, for goods or services which you have purchased or to protect Matakana Superfoods Limited copyright, trademarks and other legal rights. Security policy All information matakanasuperfoods.com receives from its customers is protected by our secure server. Furthermore, all customer data collected is secured against unauthorized use or access. We use DPS hosted payment gateway with ANZ Bank Ltd merchant services as well as Paypal which are secured by SSL (secure sockets layer) encryption technology and process payment process on behalf of Matakana SuperFoods Limited. We do not store credit card information on our servers. Cancellations, Returns and Refund Policy We hope that you are happy with your purchase but should you wish to return any item to us, we will be happy to refund or replace a product subject to the following conditions: 1. We will provide a full refund or replacement (at your election) if the quality of goods delivered is unacceptable (proof may be required). This is on the condition that you contact us within 24 hours of receiving the goods either by phone or email (to be obtained from the website). We recommend you check the contents of your parcel prior to signing the courier. 2. Before returning any goods, the customer must contact MATAKANA SUPERFOODS by phone or email (to be obtained from the website). 3. We do not accept cancellations once your order has been handed to our courier for delivery. 4. We do not provide refunds for change of mind returns. 5. All eligible refund requests will be processed within 30 days. 6. Subject to the terms above, we are happy to refund or replace any item requested within 30 days of delivery. Payment You can choose one of the payment methods below for your order each time you place an order. Credit Card Payment via Stripe credit card payment gateway or Paypal. All credit card transactions are processed in New Zealand in New Zealand dollars (NZD). Some banks may charge an overseas transaction fee and/or foreign currency exchange fee for purchases outside of New Zealand. New Zealand. Pricing All prices on our website are represented in New Zealand dollars (NZ$) and include New Zealand goods and services tax (GST). All prices are correct at time of publication; however we reserve the right to alter our prices for any reason at any time. Promotions / Sales Any promotions, sales or discount codes for use on the Matakana Superfoods website are valid exclusively for first-time purchases. These offers cannot be utilised for existing (repeat) subscriptions or wholesale orders. Promotional codes are not valid on already discounted items or during sitewide sales. Discounts cannot be combined. Valid on selected products only, excludes gift cards. Disclaimer We will not be liable to you or any third parties for any direct, indirect, special, consequential or punitive damages allegedly sustained arising out of your access to (or inability to access) our website. This includes viruses alleged to have been obtained from our website, your use of (or reliance on) any of the information or materials available on our website, regardless of the type of claim or the nature of the cause of action. Complaints If you have any complaints about the matakanasuperfoods.com service, please contact us here. Choosing a selection results in a full page refresh. Opens in a new window. Withdrawal