Shop the Best Monk Fruit and Erythritol Sweetener - Lakanto
 – Lakanto USA Skip to content Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Pinterest SUBSCRIBE & SAVE ON EVERY ORDER! Free shipping on orders $75+ Get our NEW Reduced Sugar Products - Buy All 3 and Save! Get your FREE BBQ 101 E-BOOK Shop Shop Sweetener Sweetener Allulose Blend Erythritol Blend Lifestyle Lifestyle Sugar Free Keto Gluten Free Nut Free Vegan Shop By Meal Shop By Meal Baking Breakfast foods Snacks and treats Ready to eat Recipes SWEET REWARDS Log in Language English English Español Facebook Pinterest Instagram TikTok YouTube Shop Sweetener Allulose Blend Erythritol Blend Lifestyle Sugar Free Keto Gluten Free Nut Free Vegan Shop By Meal Baking Breakfast foods Snacks and treats Ready to eat Recipes SWEET REWARDS Language English English Español Search Log in Cart Item added to your cart View cart Check out Continue shopping Skip to product information Open media 1 in modal Open media 2 in modal Open media 3 in modal Open media 4 in modal Open media 5 in modal Open media 6 in modal Open media 7 in modal Open media 8 in modal Open media 9 in modal Open media 10 in modal Open media 11 in modal Open media 12 in modal 1 / of 12 Classic Monkfruit and Erythritol Sweetener - White Sugar Replacement Classic Monkfruit and Erythritol Sweetener - White Sugar Replacement Regular price $14.59 Regular price $14.59 Sale price $14.59 Unit price $0.91 / per oz Sale Sold out Shipping calculated at checkout. The best white sugar substitute that's perfect for cookies, coffee, desserts, and other sweet, sugar-free treats. It tastes, bakes, and cooks like sugar. Great sugar alternative. Made with only monk fruit sweetener and erythritol. Great for Cooking and Baking 1:1 Sugar Replacement Zero Calories Keto Friendly One-Time Purchase $14.59 Most Popular Subscribe & Save $14.59 Select frequency Every 1 Week Every 2 Weeks Every 4 Weeks Every 6 Weeks 10% off recurring deliveries Customize your subscription anytime Skip, Pause, or cancel anytime. Size 1 LB Variant sold out or unavailable 8.29 oz Variant sold out or unavailable 1.76 LBS Variant sold out or unavailable 3 LBS Variant sold out or unavailable 5 LBS Variant sold out or unavailable Quantity ( 0 in cart) Decrease quantity for Classic Monkfruit and Erythritol Sweetener - White Sugar Replacement Increase quantity for Classic Monkfruit and Erythritol Sweetener - White Sugar Replacement Add to cart This item is a deferred, subscription, or recurring purchase. By continuing, I agree to the cancellation policy and authorize you to charge my payment method at the prices, frequency and dates listed on this page until my order is fulfilled or I cancel, if permitted. Free shipping on orders $75+ MORE ABOUT THE PRODUCT Lakanto Classic Monkfruit Sweetener is our original sugar replacement, crafted to bring the sweetness you love with none of the sugar. Made with just two ingredients, it measures cup for cup like sugar , making it easy to swap into coffee, baking, cooking, and all your favorite recipes. Whether you're reducing sugar or simply looking for a better everyday sweetener, our Classic Monkfruit with Erythritol Sweetener makes the switch effortless. Product Highlights Measures 1:1 like sugar Zero Calories Zero Net Carbs Made with Monk Fruit Extract & Erythritol Great for baking, cooking, and beverages Keto Friendly Non-GMO Project Verified WHY LAKANTO The best sugar alternative is one you don't have to think about. Lakanto Classic Monkfruit and Erythritol Sweetener dissolves smoothly in hot and cold drinks, bakes beautifully in your favorite recipes, and delivers clean sweetness without the bitter aftertaste of many artificial sweeteners. Perfect for Coffee and tea Cookies, cakes and muffins Smoothies Oatmeal and yogurt Homemade sauces Everyday cooking From weekday breakfasts to holiday baking, it's the simple way to enjoy more of what you love with less sugar. HOW TO USE Swap it just like sugar. No complicated math. No recipe adjustments. Simply replace sugar 1:1 in your favorite recipes. Use it in: Coffee and tea Baking Cooking Lemonade Smoothies Oatmeal Fresh fruit Homemade desserts Store in a cool, dry place and reseal after each use. WHAT'S INSIDE Just two thoughtfully selected ingredients. Non-GMO Erythritol Provides the texture, volume, and baking performance of sugar with zero calories. Monk Fruit Extract A naturally sweet fruit that lets us create delicious sweetness without adding sugar. Ingredients Non-GMO Erythritol Monk Fruit Extract Learn more about Erythritol View full details Sign in to see your rewards Sign in LATEST RECIPES Strawberry Orange Crumb Bars These crumb bars have a tart strawberry and orange filling that's sandwiched between a buttery shortbread crust.  These bars are gluten free, dairy free, paleo and vegan! Strawberry Orange Crumb Bars These crumb bars have a tart strawberry and orange filling that's sandwiched between a buttery shortbread crust.  These bars are gluten free, dairy free, paleo and vegan! Single Serve Apple Crisp Apple crisp is a classic for a reason. Warm baked apples, sweet cinnamon-spiced filling, and a golden oat crumble come together for a comforting dessert that's perfect for fall. This... Single Serve Apple Crisp Apple crisp is a classic for a reason. Warm baked apples, sweet cinnamon-spiced filling, and a golden oat crumble come together for a comforting dessert that's perfect for fall. This... Mini Protein Cake When a chocolate craving hits, sometimes you just need a little cake. This Mini Protein Cake is a simple, single-serve dessert that's warm, chocolatey, and ready in just minutes. It's... Mini Protein Cake When a chocolate craving hits, sometimes you just need a little cake. This Mini Protein Cake is a simple, single-serve dessert that's warm, chocolatey, and ready in just minutes. It's... Pumpkin Spice Pancakes These fluffy and delicious pancakes are made with our Pumpkin Spice Muffin Mix, making it easy to whip up a cozy, seasonal breakfast in no time! Pumpkin Spice Pancakes These fluffy and delicious pancakes are made with our Pumpkin Spice Muffin Mix, making it easy to whip up a cozy, seasonal breakfast in no time! Easy Grilled Peaches These grilled peaches are the perfect summer dessert. They take just 10 minutes to whip up, and you can add any toppings you'd like! The secret to these is sprinkling... Easy Grilled Peaches These grilled peaches are the perfect summer dessert. They take just 10 minutes to whip up, and you can add any toppings you'd like! The secret to these is sprinkling... BBQ Tofu Skewers No outdoor grill? No problem! You can make these bbq tofu skewers on an indoor grill, or even using a skillet grill. They are so simple yet so flavourful, and... BBQ Tofu Skewers No outdoor grill? No problem! You can make these bbq tofu skewers on an indoor grill, or even using a skillet grill. They are so simple yet so flavourful, and... Overall rating: 4.8563476 / 5 from 1796 reviews. AI Generated Review Summary This white sugar replacement is highly praised for its great taste, texture, and zero calories, making it a perfect keto-friendly option for various sweet treats. It is also appreciated for having no aftertaste and being a suitable substitute for regular sugar in cooking and baking. Summary topics Low Carb Content ( 3% ): It was noted by customers that the low carb/keto sweetener has a great taste. Sugar Substitute ( 8% ): It was reported by customers that Lakanto sugar is a great substitute, with no aftertaste. Zero Calories ( 3% ): It was highlighted by customers that the Lakanto Classic has zero calories and is keto friendly. Taste and Texture ( 3% ): Customers keep praising the great taste and texture of the product, with many mentioning it multiple times. No Aftertaste ( 14% ): Customers appreciated that the product had no aftertaste, with multiple reviews mentioning this opinion. Review topics: [taste, feeling, shipping, problem, price, packaging, sugar, order, aftertaste, substitute, sweetness, sweetener, texture, recipe, bag, alternative, treat, results, quality, replacement, husband, mix, drink, difference, size, tooth, consistency, lakanto, reaction, chocolate]. Review highlights "It has zero net carbs, zero calories and tastes great." — Layna "Great sugar substitute" — Kathleen S. "Since I'm not doing Keto, just cutting calories, half the amount of sugar is great, and no aftertaste!" — Maria Reviews I rely on Lakanto for "I rely on Lakanto for morning coffee and baking all the time. Yours is the best tasting monk fruit sweetner" — Gloria K. ( 5/5 ) The Best "This is the only sugar substitute I've ever tried that doesn't have a "fake sugar" aftertaste." — Matt ( 5/5 ) I use this i. place "I use this i. place of sugar every day. I love that it is a 1:1 replacement. ZERO after taste. dissolves like sugar too" — Tami O. ( 5/5 ) Great Taste "We've enjoyed both the white and brown Lakanto sweetners. It's worked well in our coffee, tea and baking needs. We've purchased it for several years. Always good purchase experience with Lakanto." — Debbie ( 5/5 ) Great for Baking "I use this in a lot of my baking to cut back on granulated sugar. It works great and never disappoints m" — Nanaof4 ( 5/5 ) A wonderful substitute! "Classic Lakanto sugar is a wonderful substitute for granulated sugar in baking! Great for diabetics! Enjoy desserts and so many recipes, now without the sugar!" — Debie ( 5/5 ) Great but ……. "Love the monkfruit sweetener but the packaging truly sucks. Hard to close up. Please rework this. Thx" — Sue ( 4/5 ) I finally found a sugar "I finally found a sugar substitute that I like!" — Carol O. ( 5/5 ) As a pre-diabetic I have "As a pre-diabetic I have switched to erythritol sweeteners. I like the combination with monk fruit the best. I will be continuing to buy this as I need it." — Susan S. ( 5/5 ) love this never will go "love this never will go back to sugar" — Deanna L. ( 5/5 ) Q&A Can I use food stamps ? Hi! Sadly, we are unable to process EBT cards at this time, but we are hoping to have this as an available option in the future! Why can’t I order to Canada?? That is a great question! We sadly, do not ship to Canada from our website at this time, however I do have a couple of options for you. If you&#x27;d like to order online then you may order our products on amazon.ca, iherb.com, or www.well.ca. We also carry product in Loblaw’s, Walmart and Metro. I&#x27;d just call beforehand to make sure they have the product you desire! Is this powdered like confectioners sugar ? Hi! The Classic Sweetener can be ground down into a Confectioners Sweetener. It comes in Granular form. Are the monkfruit sweeteners (classic and golden) certified kosher? I do not see a kosher certifying agency symbol on the packages shown on this website. Thank you. Hi Sharon,  Thank you for reaching out to us here at Lakanto. The following products were Kosher Certified under the Pareve Status by Kosher Check: Lakanto Pure Monkfruit Extract 30%, Lakanto Classic, Golden, and Powdered Pure Monkfruit Sweetener.  Our other products are kosher compliant, but are not certified at this time. We apologize for the inconvenience, please do not hesitate to reach back out if there is anything else that I can do.  Have a Sweet Day! What are the ingredients Hi! Here are the ingredients for the Classic Monkfruit:  Non-GMO erythritol and Monk Fruit extract. Subscribe to our emails Be the first to know about new collections and exclusive offers. Email Orem, UT 84057 info@lakanto.com Contact Us (800) 513-7936 Wholesale Account Support wholesale@lakanto.com Contact Us (800) 513-7936 ext.2 CONTACT US Contact Us FAQ Careers Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Refund and Return Policy Shipping Policy Holiday Shipping Schedule HTML Sitemap Reviews COMPANY About Partnerships What's Monk Fruit? What's Allulose? What's Erythritol? Shop Blog Storefront Int'l iHerb Store Wholesale Inquiries Co-Packing Inquiries Our Family of Brands ACCOUNT Account Log in Register SWEET REWARDS Subscribe & Save Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Pinterest Language English English Español © 2026, Lakanto USA . Choosing a selection results in a full page refresh. Opens in a new window.