Oligofructose | The 100% natural sugar replacer | BENEO Skip to content Home » Human Nutrition » Ingredients for Human Nutrition » Functional Fibres » Oligofructose Solution finder Specifications Oligofructose | The 100% natural sugar replacer Oligofructose is an inulin-type fructan and is derived from Inulin through partial enzymatic hydrolysis. This conversion is a process that occurs naturally within the chicory root towards the end of the harvest. It can therefore be said to be of 100% vegetable origin. After enzymatic hydrolysis, purification is continued in order to meet even the highest quality requirements , including those for infant nutrition. Nutritional benefits: Digestive Health: improving the balance of intestinal flora Weight management: calories count – go for less sugar Blood sugar management: sugar levels – less is more How BENEO advances sustainable nutrition through innovative ingredients Discover how BENEO combines science, natural ingredients, and responsible sourcing to create solutions that support healthier lifestyles and a more sustainable food system. This video highlights our commitment to transparency, eco-friendly production, and evidence-based nutrition. Watch this video on YouTube ice cream Ice cream cereal bars Food applications: Baked goods Baby food Beverages Breakfast cereals & cereal bars Candy Dairy alternatives Dairy products Fillings Frozen desserts Fruit preparations Solution finder Sugar out, fibre in – The ideal sugar replacer With a sweetness profile of minimally 30% that of sucrose, the benefits reach beyond the nutritional benefits of fibre. Its mildly sweet taste and sugar-like technical properties makes it the perfect natural sugar replacer . Moreover it also allows for calorie reduction and a higher fibre content.  By imparting a delicate natural sweetness, it is often combined with high intensity sweeteners to create a more balanced and sugar-like palate without any off-taste. Easy implementation in production process The best soluble dietary fibre – even better than sucrose! This facilitates easy processing without the necessity of having to implement any changes to the production process. Typical examples are cereal binding syrups and dairy fruit preparations. The oligofructose product range: A shorter chain inulin that is available in five different varieties with different fibre content and sweetness levels. It is particularly useful and often applied when high solubility and a natural sweetness profile are needed. Content Sweetness level Descriptor Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® L85 Oligofructose Content ~85% Sweetness level ~50% Descriptor Liquid Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® L90 Oligofructose Content ~90% Sweetness level ~40% Descriptor Liquid Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® L92 Oligofructose Content ~92% Sweetness level ~40% Descriptor Liquid Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® L95 Oligofructose Content ~95% Sweetness level ~30% Descriptor Liquid Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® P95 Oligofructose Content ~95% Sweetness level ~30% Descriptor Oligofructose powder Organic Oligofructose Product Name Orafti ® Organic OF Oligofructose Content ~95% Sweetness level ~30% Descriptor Organic Oligofructose powder Product Name Orafti ® Organic BF Oligofructose Content ~95% Sweetness level ~30% Descriptor Organic Oligofructose powder, specifically for use in baby foods DP: Degree of polymerisation Sweetness: % compared to sucrose Above values are indicative and may vary per specific application and process. In-depth information Sugar-reduced fruit yoghurt with Oligofructose Recipe for mildly sweet (up to 55% that of sucrose) yoghurt with a creamy mouthfeel and enhanced fibre content. DOWNLOAD DESCARGAR BAIXAR 阅读更多 Chicory root fibre and digestive health Find out more about the physiological benefits associated with chicory root fiber – from the prebiotic effect to weight management and more. WEBSITE DIETARYFIBER.ORG Concepts, recipes & ingredients search Inspiring concepts with Oligofructose Inspiring ideas with Oligofructose offer new angles of product positioning towards consumers & market insights. They are substantiated by science and come with a regulatory guideline. MORE OLIGOFRUCTOSE CONCEPTS Proven recipes with Oligofructose Concepts are worked out by a team of dedicated food application technologists into concrete recipes that we share with you after extensive testing on lab. MORE OLIGOFRUCTOSE RECIPES Find the right ingredient Use the BENEO ingredient solution finder for an instant overview of technical and nutritional benefits across applications. START YOUR SEARCH Discover our other functional fibres superstars! INULIN BETA-GLUCANS SHORT CHAIN FOS More on oligofructose ? CONTACT US