Inulin from Orafti® | Prebiotic, dietary chicory root fibre | BENEO Skip to content Home » Human Nutrition » Ingredients for Human Nutrition » Functional Fibres » Inulin Solution finder Specifications Inulin | Naturally sourced fibre from chicory root Inulin-type fructans , such as Orafti ® Inulin, occur naturally in a great number of plants and vegetables, though the chicory root is a particularly wealthy source. As it is extracted through hot water processing, chicory root is of 100 % vegetable origin . After extraction, purification takes place in order to meet even the highest quality requirements , including those for infant nutrition. Nutritional benefits: Digestive Health: improving the balance of intestinal flora Weight management: reduce food intake calories count – reduce fat content Stronger bones: increase calcium absorption How BENEO advances sustainable nutrition through innovative ingredients Discover how BENEO combines science, natural ingredients, and responsible sourcing to create solutions that support healthier lifestyles and a more sustainable food system. This video highlights our commitment to transparency, eco-friendly production, and evidence-based nutrition. Watch this video on YouTube Image Slide bakery Bakery Slide beverages Slide confectionery Slide dairy Food applications: Baked goods Baby food Beverages Breakfast cereals Cereal bars Candy Chocolate Dairy alternatives Dairy products Dry mixes Fillings Frozen desserts Fruit preparations Meat products Soups & sauces Table spreads Solution finder Fibre in, fat out – The ideal fat replacer It is an ideal fat replacer and is easily incorporated in moist or semi-moist food products. Our fructans help create a creamy taste and similar mouthfeel to fat. This enables developers to replace part of the fat content of their products by Orafti ® Inulin. Perfectly suited for low-fat products, in which it can: – improve body and mouthfeel , for an excellent flavour profile, – reduce the caloric value of products without compromising taste or texture. – improves the stability of dairy mousses and foams. Easy implementation in the production process Orafti ® Inulin is a soluble dietary fibre which allows for easy processing without adapting or changing the production process. Our range offers a unique solution to formulations requiring high dosages of fibre when water availability is limited. The product range Inulin can be categorised into three main product groups: standard Inulin, long chain Inulin and Oligofructose -enriched Inulin. These ingredient types offer different levels of solubility, sweetness and fibre content. Our experts are keen on helping you identify the solution for your application. Content Sweetness level Descriptor Standard Product Name Orafti ® GR Inulin Content ~92% Sweetness level 10% Descriptor Granulated Inulin powder, average DP ≥ 10 Product Name Orafti ® ST-Gel Inulin Content ~92% Sweetness level 10% Descriptor Inulin powder for high dispersibility (instant), average DP ≥ 10 Product Name Orafti ® HSI Inulin Content ~88% Sweetness level 30% Descriptor High soluble Inulin powder Long chain Product Name Orafti ® FTX Inulin Content ~98% Sweetness level 0% Descriptor Texturizing Inulin powder for fat replacement at high processing temperatures Product Name Orafti ® HP Inulin Content ~100% Sweetness level 0% Descriptor High performance Inulin powder for fat replacement at low processing temperatures, average DP ≥ 23 Product Name Orafti ® HPX Inulin Content ~100% Sweetness level 0% Descriptor High performance Inulin powder for fat replacement at high processing temperatures, average DP ≥ 23 Oligofructose-enriched Product Name Orafti ® Synergy1 Inulin Content ~92% Sweetness level N/A Descriptor Dedicated combination of longer and shorter chain Inulin to achieve specific physiological effects Organic Inulin Product Name Orafti ® Organic IN Inulin Content ~95% Sweetness level 0% Descriptor Organic Inulin powder DP: Degree of polymerisation Sweetness: % compared to sucrose Above values are indicative and may vary per specific application and process. Experience the benefits of inulin Improved digestive health with prebiotic fibres Digestive health is a wellness issue and awareness on the beneficial effect of dietary fibre is growing. Get a close-up of the science behind prebiotics and benefits on inner wellbeing of Orafti ® chicory root fibres.Let our experts walk you through the technical and physiological benefits of our ingredients, market insights, consumer concepts and recipes based on top-level food engineering. WATCH WEBINAR VER WEBINAR Fat reduction, smooth textures & rich tasting sweetness Break away from the established pattern with naturally-sourced prebiotic fibres and starches. Formulate fat-reduced recipes with highly stable ingredients that help create smooth textures and a rich taste. Let our experts walk you through the technical and physiological benefits of our ingredients, market insights, consumer concepts and recipes based on top-level food engineering. WATCH WEBINAR In-depth information Improved bowel function with dietary fibres Learn more about the mechanism behind dietary fibres, market trends and recipe inspiring fibre-enriched fruit preparations. DOWNLOAD Chicory root fibre and digestive health Find out more about the physiological benefits associated with chicory root fiber – from the prebiotic effect to weight management and more. WEBSITE DIETARYFIBER.ORG Creative concepts, recipes and ingredients search Inspiring concepts with Inulin Inspiring ideas with Inulin offer new angles of product positioning towards consumers & market insights. They are substantiated by science and come with a regulatory guideline. MORE INULIN CONCEPTS Proven recipes with Inulin Concepts are worked out by a team of dedicated food application technologists into concrete recipes that we share with you after extensive testing on lab. MORE INULIN RECIPES Find the right ingredient Use the BENEO ingredient solution finder for an instant overview of technical and nutritional benefits across applications. START YOUR SEARCH Discover our other functional fibres superstars! OLIGOFRUCTOSE BETA-GLUCANS sc-FOS SHORT CHAIN FOS More on inulin ? CONTACT US We'd love your quick feedback! How did you recently come across BENEO? How did you recently come across BENEO? Trade show or conference Webinar or online event BENEO website or blog Newsletter or email from BENEO Social media (e.g. LinkedIn) Article or advertisement about BENEO (online or print) Market product Other: Voting on page Voting on page page url Other: