Fibruline - Cosucra Our ingredients Fibruline TM CHICORY ROOT FIBRE FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre, inulin and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibre, oligofructose are a range of soluble dietary fibres, extracted by a natural process which provide nutritional, health and functional benefits for a wide range of food applications and dietary supplements and don’t contain added sugars. Summary FIBRULINE™ NATURE’S ANSWER FILL THE FIBRE GAP A RANGE OF INVISIBLE FIBRES ADAPTED TO YOUR NEEDS ISO VERIFIED NATURAL FIBRE BLOOD GLUCOSE MANAGEMENT IMPROVED BOWEL FUNCTION, DIGESTIVE HEALTH BODY WEIGHT MANAGEMENT BONE HEALTH BY MINERAL ABSORPTION INNER DEFENSES, IMMUNITY Back to our ingredients FIBRULINE™ NATURE’S ANSWER BENEFITS OF CHICORY ROOT FIBRES NUTRITIONAL Fibre fortification Sugar out, fibre in Fibre in, fat out Calorie reduction HEALTH Prebiotic fibre Digestive health Improved bowel function Blood glucose management Body weight management Bone health Immunity FUNCTIONAL Easy-to-use, colourless, high soluble fibre with no impact on taste Sugar-like properties with mild sweetness but with no contribution to added sugars declaration Masking off-taste from intense sweeteners Fat-mimetic properties improving mouthfeel and creaminess In liquid form, perfect binder that improves the shelf-life … and of course non-GMO, minimally processed form a sustainable raw material ! A RANGE OF INVISIBLE FIBRES ADAPTED TO YOUR NEEDS FILL THE FIBRE GAP Dietary fibre is an essential component of the human diet. However, it is present in amounts typically lower than recommended by health authorities. Depending on local advice, food and health authorities and the national nutrition societies recommend a daily intake of 25 – 40 g fibre with typically 2/3 insoluble and 1/3 soluble fibres, an amount that most people find difficult to achieve. Fibre-enriched products can help consumers to improve their diets by increasing fibre intake. Every Food Authority has recognized chicory root fibres, inulin and oligofructose as approved dietary fibres, which makes it easily recognizable on any packaged foods as being part of the nutrient declaration. Also good to know is that 63% of global consumers associate fiber with digestive health and 67% with immunity . Dietary fibres are naturally present in many whole grains, fruits, vegetables and legumes. Various types of dietary fibre exist, often with specific characteristics. They can be categorized into e.g. insoluble fibres and soluble fibres, fermentable, non-fermentable and partially fermentable fibres, and viscous or non-viscous fibres. FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre, inulin and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibre, oligofructose are special dietary fibres because they are prebiotic. A UNIQUE PREBIOTIC FIBRE Chicory root fibres FIBRULINE™ inulin, and FIBRULOSE™ oligofructose are recognized by International Scientific Association of Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) as one of the only prebiotics defined as “A substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit” based on 3g/day onwards. Chicory root fibres are plant-based prebiotic fibres that are not digested nor absorbed in the small intestine. Instead, they reach the large intestine (= gut) where they are 100% fermented by the micobiota. They serve as a food substrate to grow the intestinal bacteria, especially Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli, which contributes to a balanced ecosystem for a healthy tummy and stimulates the growth of short chain fatty acids (SCFA) and other metabolites. The prebiotic properties of chicory root fibres are based on strong science and have been translated in health-related claims by many food authorities. Learn more on ISAPP Via the gut-brain axis and other routes, communication with other parts of the body takes place. This is being linked to a number of advantages such as activation of bowel movement , enhancement of mineral absorption , improved appetite control , stimulation of the immune system , inhibition of pathogens, addressing systematic inflammation processes and many more benefits of emerging science projects. Good to know is that 78% of consumers globally say their digestive health is very important to them. The top 3 benefits linked with gut health being overall physical health, mental well-being and immune function. Indeed 59% of global consumers (Europe 56%, North-America 59%, South America 58%, Asia-Pacific 62% and Africa 60%) associate prebiotics with immune health. 1 out of 3 (31%) of global consumers having an awareness of prebiotics in food and drink recognize chicory root fibre and inulin , which is almost twice compared to products claiming to have prebiotic effect such as soluble corn fibre (14%), polydextrose (17%) and lactulose (16%). A RANGE OF INVISIBLE FIBRES ADAPTED TO YOUR NEEDS FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre, inulin and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibre, oligofructose are nature’s answer to rebalance the nutritional profile of your favourite food choices by carving out added sugars, replace undesired fats and reduce the excess of calories, replace them into nutritious invisible fibres offering similar health benefits without affecting taste, texture, mouthfeel and shelf-life. They do not contain added sugars. Let us assist you in finding the right choice in function of intended use an application. FIBRULOSE™ LCF CHICORY ROOT FIBRE – LIQUID ~90% oligofructose on dry matter, 65.5% dietary fibre (1) as such Key attributes : High fibre liquid chicory with 40% sweetness for easy 1:1 sugar replacement Provides excellent binding properties Humectant and fat replacer in low moisture systems Does not contain added sugars Suggested applications : Fibre fortification and sugar substitution: Baked goods ( biscuits , cakes , muffins, …) , Bars , Cereals and clusters, Dairy beverages , frozen desserts , Chilled fruit preparations , Plant based beverages , desserts , (Plant-based) Savoury , Table-top sweetener , Supplement gums Fat replacement: Low moisture systems such as biscuits, cakes and muffins (1) Dietary fibre as non-digestible carbohydrate oligo- or polymers with three or more monomeric units (DP≥3) FIBRULINE™ INSTANT CHICORY ROOT FIBRE – POWDER ~92% inulin on dry matter, 88% dietary fibre (1) as such Key attributes : All-round easy-to incorporate solution for fibre fortification, replacing sugar and fat when no additional functional benefits are needed Suggested applications : Bread , Pastas and noodles , Dairy beverages , desserts , frozen desserts , Plant based beverages & desserts , Extruded snacks , Soups, Chocolate Confectionery, Spreads , Powder beverages , Meal replacers , Tablets, Baby food formulae (1) Dietary fibre as non-digestible carbohydrate oligo- or polymers with three or more monomeric units (DP≥3) FIBRULINE™ XL CHICORY ROOT FIBRE – POWDER ~99.5% inulin on dry matter, 94.5% dietary fibre (1) as such Key attributes : All-round easy-to incorporate solution for fibre fortification, replacing sugar and fat when no additional functional benefits are needed Texturizing chicory fibre for more fat mimetic properties in higher moisture systems Longer chain inulin to combine with other oligosaccharides for specific health benefits Suggested applications : Creaminess and/or fat replacement: Dairy fresh cheese , (Frozen) desserts , Spreads , Plant-based savoury , Plant based cream cheese & desserts , Emulsified meat, Nuggets, Sauces Texture improvement: frozen doughs Fibre fortification: Bread Baby food formulae as polyfructose (1) Dietary fibre as non-digestible carbohydrate oligo- or polymers with three or more monomeric units (DP≥3) FIBRULINE™ S30 CHICORY ROOT FIBRE – POWDER ~97% inulin on dry matter, 93% dietary fibre (1) as such Key attributes : Higher solubility for sugar substitution into high fibre in lower moisture systems Suggested applications : Fibre fortification and sugar substitution: Confectionery , cakes, biscuits , fat fillings , chilled fruit & cereal preparations for (non) dairy desserts , Table-top sweeteners (1) Dietary fibre as non-digestible carbohydrate oligo- or polymers with three or more monomeric units (DP≥3) FIBRULOSE™ F97 CHICORY ROOT FIBRE – POWDER ~92% oligofructose on dry matter, 89% dietary fibre (1) as such Key attributes : Higher solubility for sugar substitution into high fibre in lower moisture systems Highest solubility in powder with lowest net carbs Shorter chain oligofructose Suggested applications : For maximum sugar replacement when needed. Supplements (1) Dietary fibre as non-digestible carbohydrate oligo- or polymers with three or more monomeric units (DP≥3) ISO VERIFIED NATURAL FIBRE ISO has recently established a new criterion for designating foodstuff ingredients as being « natural » : the natural presence has become a pre-eminent criterion in obtaining this certification. Consequently, various other foodstuff fibers, which are not present in nature, cannot obtain this certification. A range of FIBRULINE™ chicory root fiber: COSUCRA consequently benefits from the designation « natural » according to the ISO19657:2017 standard. BLOOD GLUCOSE MANAGEMENT 1.9 billion people globally are overweight, and diabetes caused death of 1.6 million in 2019. WHO recommends adults and children reduce their daily intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake and even suggests further reduction to 5% or roughly 25 grams (6 teaspoons). Foods with high levels of easily digestible carbohydrates (eg. high glycaemic sugars and starches), causes a fast release of glucose in the blood. Reducing the blood glucose level is considered as favourable for the body’s metabolism and is associated which health benefits such as reducing the risk of type II diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Unlike ‘fast’ sugars, FIBRULINE™ and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibres do not increase blood glucose levels after a meal as they are resistant to digestion and absorption in the small intestine. This favourable effect on blood sugar metabolism has been demonstrated in various scientific studies. Authorities such as EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) has concluded in a cause and effect relationship between the consumption of chicory root fibres instead of sugar, as well as on a reduction of the glycaemic response compared to sugar containing foods. This allows for instance food manufacturers in the EU to claim on pack the qualified Art 13.5 health by mentioning “Consumption of food containing chicory root fibre instead of sugars induces a lower blood glucose rise after their consumption compared to a sugar-containing food” when using FIBRULINE™ or FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibres. Conditions of use being a 30% sugar reduction by chicory root fibres and the energy of the product should be less or equal to the reference. In combination with this health claim pack may label wordings such as “ Support healthy blood glucose levels ” or “ Contributes to reducing glycaemic response ” highlighting the health benefits of FIBRULINE™ or FIBRULOSE™ as regulated by Art 10.3. general health-related well-being claim provisions. Good to know is that WHO has recommended in 2023 that replacing sugars by non-nutritive sweeteners is not an appropriate strategy to reduce on the long-term the increased risk of type II diabetes and obesity. People should reduce the sweetness of the diet to improve their health. Dietary fibres are in opposition to non-nutritive sweeteners essential nutrients. Discover our concepts IMPROVED BOWEL FUNCTION, DIGESTIVE HEALTH FIBRULINE™ supports the digestive system by increasing the levels of important bacteria living in your gut, nourishing your gut microbiota . Practically, chicory root fibre – inulin, contributes to a better regulated transit and a higher stool frequency. Having a good digestion is key for a healthy life. It helps our body to absorb all the nutrients it needs to r un smoothly . FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre arrives intact in the colon and is selectively fermented as a prebiotic chicory root fibre. Stool volume and softness are increased by fermentation. Stool volume stimulates mechanically bowel contraction, whereas short-chain fatty acids stimulate it chemically. Good to know is that in EU for instance a general health and well-being claims with wordings such as “Promotes digestive health” or “Supporting a balanced digestive system” can be applied on pack based on a unique approved art 13.5. health claim related to the increase of stool frequency. Products containing only 4g of FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre can claim these benefits based on a recommended daily intake of 12g as European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) confirmed health relationship between chicory root fibre, inulin and the bowel function. Discover our concepts BODY WEIGHT MANAGEMENT In 2019, 1.9 billion people globally were already overweight and WHO estimates global obesity will reach over 1 billion adults globally by 2030. Replacing added sugars (4kcal/g) or fats (9kcal/g) by nutritious FIBRULINE™ & FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibres (2kcal/g) reduce the caloric density of foods. But there is more … Fermentation of chicory root fibres by beneficial bacteria in the gut induce a cascade of metabolic effects that can ultimately result in lower food intake. Scientific studies suggest that this may be caused by the short chain fatty acids (SCFA) produced during fermentation, which may regulate food intake through modulation of hormones (GLP-1, PYY) involved in hunger and satiety . FIBRULINE™ and FIBRULOSE™ help you to eat less and stay healthy. BONE HEALTH BY MINERAL ABSORPTION The International Osteoporosis Foundation (IOF) reports that osteoporosis causes more than 8.9 million fractures annually. 500 million men and women worldwide over the age of 50 may be affected. Keeping healthy bones through a good bone mineral density over life is key for a good health and well-being. Our body builds bone density during childhood and into the mid-20s through intake of calcium and other minerals and nutrients through our food and beverage. Throughout adulthood bone mass then decreases, with an acceleration in demineralization in women after menopause. Osteoporosis is also called a ‘silent disease’ because there are no symptoms or pain until a fracture occurs. A sufficient supply of calcium is important for lifelong bone health. but the calcium from our diet is only absorbed for only about 1/3. Scientific studies indicate that the prebiotic fermentation of FIBRULINE™ and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibres increase the absorption of calcium at 8g/day , through enhancement of the absorption capacity of the large intestine and contributes to an improvement of bone mineral density, which is linked to stronger bones. INNER DEFENSES, IMMUNITY 70% of our immune system is situated in the intestine , and the gut is also home to trillions of microbes. These gut microbes play an important role in regulating the immune system. Good health and inner protection starts with promoting the beneficial gut microbiota. Gut microbiota are partially influenced by a heritage component but larger determinants are environmental factors like medications, location and diet. In fact, diet is the crucial contributor to maintain a balanced gut microbiota. Consumption of prebiotics FIBRULINE™ and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibres leads to increases in beneficial bacteria in the gut such as the bifidobacteria . These bacteria ultimately promote an increase in short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and other metabolites as a result of their fermentation . This helps maintain a favourable environment for a balanced microbiota and reduce the growth of pathogens . Furthermore, breakdown products and metabolites are absorbed into the bloodstream, through which they will reach and positively affect other parts of the immune system and other organs. Indeed, in addition to the metabolic role , the gut microbiota also function as: barrier : shield against pathogens and production of protective mucus; defense : development of the intestinal immune system; maintenance : maturation of GI tract, maintenance of intestinal mucosa. In case of an unbalanced microbiota between good and pathogen micro-organisms (also called dysbiosis), inflammatory conditions will appear and lead to the development of chronic diseases. DIGESTIVE HEALTH AND TOLERANCE The European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) and the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) recommend a fibre intake of at least 25-28 grams per day for adults combining both, insoluble and soluble fibres. EFSA estimates that the actual daily fibre intake is on average 20 grams, with the lowest 10 grams. Health authorities recognize addition of chicory root fibre such as FIBRULINE™ and FIBRULOSE™ as an easy way to reduce the “fibre gap”. European union has also recognized health claims related to “blood glucose management” as well as “supporting the normal bowel function” base on a dosage of min 12 grams per day. Consuming 10 grams of pure inulin or oligofructose in a single meal or 20 grams through the day FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre, inulin and FIBRULOSE™ chicory root fibre, oligofructose provides a substantial part of the daily recommended total fibre intake and is both effective and well-tolerated for adults. As for fibre intake adequate recommendation exist for younger people including babies . Our resources see all resources Return Brochure FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre ingredient’s brochure FIBRULINE™, chicory root fibre or chicory inulin, is an easy-to-use dietary fibre obtained from chicory roots. While being certified as a naturally-sourced ingredient, it has several health and nutritional benefits as for example fibre enrichment, improvement of digestive health and sugar and fat substitute. Chicory FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre Functional performances Health & Nutrition Plant-based Rebalance the nutritional profile More details Brochure COSUCRA corporate brochure COSUCRA believes in the future of food. We are commited to promote a modern, healthy and sustainable nutrition by concentrating the benefits of nature in easy-to-use, integrated solutions that respect consumer choices. Chicory Pea FIBRULINE™ chicory root fibre NASTAR™ pea starch PISANE™ pea protein SWELITE™ pea fibre Functional performances Health & Nutrition Plant-based Rebalance the nutritional profile More details See all resources Discover other ingredients PISANE™ From yellow pea, PISANE™ is a nutritious, functional and sustainable whole range of plant proteins. SWELITE™ A naturally sourced ingredient, SWELITE™ is an insoluble internal pea fibre obtained from yellow peas by using a gentle process. NASTAR™ NASTAR™ is a native starch extracted from yellow peas. Compared to other native starches, yellow pea starch has the highest amylose content. EXAFINE™ EXAFINE™ is a label-friendly naturally sourced cost-effective insoluble fibre.