Determination of Polyphenolic Profile of Apple Pomace
(Malus domestica Golden Delicious Variety) by HPLC–MS
Email: esalas@uach.mx.
Email: mballinas@uach.mx. Tel.: +52 (614) 2366000.
Apple (Malus domestica Borkh) is
an appreciated source of polyphenols. Phenolic compounds are known
as natural antioxidants and have a wide range of applications in different
industries. Apple pomace has the potential of being an alternative
source of polyphenols. To determine the polyphenolic profile of apple
pomace, samples from the skin at two different stages of ripening
were extracted with 80–20% EtOH–water/acetic acid 5%
(S1) and 20–80% EtOH–water/acetic acid 5% (S2) in order
to determine the solvent system. Ripe skins extracted with S1 showed
a higher total polyphenol content or TPC (1.21 g of polyphenols per
100 g of fresh weight (FW)) than unripe apple skin, being the most
effective system tested and a mean degree of polymerization of 2.47.
Commercial apple pomace was extracted with S1, resulting in a TPC
of 0.5615 ± 0.007 g of polyphenols per 100 g of FW. Meanwhile,
the RP-HPLC-MS analysis led to the tentative identification of several
polyphenolic compounds.
Received 2023 May 9; Accepted 2023 Nov 29; Revised 2023 Nov 25; Collection date 2024 Jan 9.
Ever since the introduction
of the so-called “French paradox”
and the link between wine intake and lower death rates from coronary
heart disease was established,1 a new wave
of interest developed around the components of said beverage. Part
of the benefits described by Renaud and Lorgeril were thought to be
attributed to a particular group of biomolecules, casting a much favorable
light over antioxidants.2
Among those
molecules, there is a group of second metabolites known
as phytochemicals. Within this category, over 10,000 phytochemicals,
referred to as polyphenols, can be found. They are the second most
abundant group in plants and are widely studied for their antioxidant
capacity. Phenolic compounds are divided into simple phenols and polyphenols.
Simple phenols possess only one aromatic ring, while polyphenols possess
more aromatic rings. In addition to this characteristic, the aromatic
rings can be substituted with one or more hydroxyl groups.3,4
Lately, the use of natural antioxidants has developed, particularly
in the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries and mostly due
to the ability they possess to reduce the damage caused by oxidative
stress5 without the potential threats of
synthetic antioxidants.3
Included
in the health benefits that have been studied are action
versus neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease
and Parkinson’s disease,6 cardiovascular
diseases, cancer, asthma, obesity, oral cancer cells,7,8 inflammation, high cholesterol levels, hypertension, type 2 diabetes,
harmful microbiota,9 positive effect against Salmonella spp., Escherichia coli, and Listeria spp.10,11 Other uses include its addition to meats to preserve them by reducing
the presence of pathogens, therefore, extending the shelf life of
beef,11 and baked goods, beverages, and
dairy.12
This increase in demand
of bioactive compounds has resulted in
the search for alternative sources with high polyphenol content, predominantly
those supported in the three dimensions of sustainability (social
progress, environmental protection, and economic development), achieving
the recovery of byproducts without creating competition against food
supplies, all this while supporting a zero waste philosophy. However,
since there are other economically limiting factors such as storage
(along with some pretreatments needed, like milling or drying), and,
in some cases, shipping of byproducts, the use of local agricultural
sources should be encouraged to obtain functional ingredients.
There are many regional agricultural products that can adhere to
the requirements and principles listed above, particularly fruits.
Among the fruits known to have attracted attention as potential phenolic
sources are different apple cultivars. Apples are one of the main
fruits cultivated in the northern region of Mexico, and it has been
reported that its average annual production in the state of Chihuahua
is around 584,000 tons, representing 77% of the country’s total
apple production.13 The second main use
for apples (after consumption as fresh fruit) is juice production.
Maceration and pressing of apples in juice and cider making causes
the generation of a solid residue, called apple pomace, as a consequence.
Apple pomace accounts for up to 20–35% of the weight of
the fresh fruit.14 Due to its composition,
its inexpensive nature, and the high volume generated, it is available
for use. Apple pomace can be of great interest, with a valorization
that allow us to not only being able to take advantage of the added
value of the bioactive compounds that remain in the biomass after
it has been processed but also contributing with providing a sustainable
alternative solution to the disposal of what would otherwise be considered
waste susceptible to microbial growth.15,12
In order to benefit
from the underutilized functional ingredients
present in apple pomace, it is of utmost importance to develop the
right methodology for the extraction and recovery of phenolic compounds
(due to their sensitive nature) as a means to maintain intact the
main characteristics that draw attention to fruit and agro-waste derived
compounds, from an economic point of view, and to allow their maximum
reutilization. Being the case, the use of ultrasound-assisted extraction
can overcome some of the principal obstacles faced by traditional
technologies.
Ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) is typically
selected as a
green/environmental friendly recovery procedure, commonly used on
vegetable materials. Using cavitation (caused by high frequency waves),
UAE disrupts the cell membranes, enhancing solvent–sample contact
and therefore promoting the release of potentially bioactive compounds
with therapeutic properties such as polyphenols. Other great advantages
over traditional techniques (such as solvent application and leaching)
for phytochemical extractions are its operation conditions, low temperature
(adequate for polyphenolic compounds), reduced extraction time, and
the capacity to increase polyphenol extraction up to 20%, establishing
UAE as a sustainable alternative.16−18 However, precautionary
measures must be taken since degradation of phytochemicals can occur
as consequence of cavitation-caused oxidation19,20).
With the use of agroindustrial waste to obtain bioactive
molecules
with a high-revalorization potential on the rise, the aim of the present
study is to evaluate the suitability of apple pomace as a source of
compounds of interest (polyphenols). This can be seen as a first step
toward an extraction and purification process. At the same time, an
alternative for the exploitation of waste generated by the apple juice
and cider-making industries for their revalorization can be explored.
The obtained agrowaste-derived compounds can then be directed to a
wide range market of high-value products. This can be seen as early
efforts to change the conception from “residue” to a
revalued byproduct that can be treated as a source of polyphenols.
Furthermore, the possibility of reducing the volume of waste produced
by apple juice and cider-making industries by extracting underused
functional ingredients without competing with food sources is also
a factor that appeals to our work.
In addition to the transformation
into an extraction mix comprised
of high-value compounds, the phenolic nature of apple pomace includes
a high variety of oxidation products. Their presence within the apple
pomace makes the characterization of the phenolic compounds more difficult,
presenting a challenge on its own. Our approach of using oxidized
polyphenols present in apple pomace can be original considering that
it is not the usual source of phenolic compounds.
Materials. For preliminary studies,
apples (Malus
domestica Borkh Golden Delicious variety) produced
in the region of Cuauhtemoc (Chihuahua, Mexico) were acquired in a
local market at two different maturity stages. “Unripe”
and “ripe” (commercial maturity) apples were selected.
Both maturity stages were visually determined.
Apple pomace,
obtained after the maceration and pressing of Golden
Delicious apples, was provided by a locally based juice processing
facility (Berlanga, Huertas Orgánicas
de Mexico) located in the region of Cuauhtemoc (Chihuahua, Mexico).
Ethanol, methanol, hexane, and hydrochloric acid were purchased
from J.T.Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA) with both methanol and ethanol
also being purchased from CTR Scientific (Monterrey, N.L., Mexico).
Likewise, acetic acid was obtained from CTR Scientific (Monterrey,
Mexico) as well. Phloroglucinol, Folin-Ciocalteu′s phenol reagent,
gallic acid, chlorogenic acid, epicatechin, caffeic acid, and quercetin
were used from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Additionally, sodium
acetate from Fisher Scientific and ascorbic acid from DEQ (Nuevo Leon,
Mexico) were used. All of the reagents employed were of analytical
grade.
Chromatographic solvents: acetic acid from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis,
MO, USA); water and acetonitrile were purchased from Tedia (Fairfield,
MA, USA) and Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), with acetonitrile
obtained from J.T.Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA) as well; methanol,
J.T.Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA); and with the addition of formic
acid purchased from Fluka Analytical (Buchs, Switzerland). All chromatographic
solvents were HPLC grade.
Methods: For preliminary studies,
apples were washed with mild
soap, rinsed with abundant water (three times), and kept refrigerated
before being peeled as a preparation step. Afterward, they were peeled,
leaving as little pulp as possible attached to the skin. The skin
was stored in resealable plastic bags and kept at freezing temperatures
(−14 °C) until used. Before storage, the air inside the
bags was removed.
Moisture determination of the unripe apple
skins, ripe apple skins,
and apple pomace was carried out according to the oven-drying method
where the samples were placed in a hot air oven, with a set temperature
of 103 ± 5 °C and allowed to dry for 24 h. After this period,
the samples were allowed to cool in a desiccator for 1 h before weighting
them.
Extraction was performed as a solid–liquid, 30-min
single-step
extraction, assisted with an ultrasonic bath (Fisher Scientific, Pittsbourgh,
PA, USA) and a controlled temperature (10 °C). To determine the
best solvent system for the extraction, two solvent systems were chosen:
80–20% EtOH–water/acetic acid 5% (S1) and 20–80%
EtOH–water/acetic acid 5% (S2). Extraction was performed in
duplicate in Erlenmeyer flasks maintaining a sample/solvent ratio
of 100 g of sample/250 mL solvent.
The extracts were then concentrated
under reduced pressure to a
volume of 100 mL of acidified water (1% acetic acid) prior to cleaning
steps consisting of: (a) a cold ethanol precipitation (with one volume
on cold ethanol during 24 h) that was carried out to remove polar
coextracted compounds (such as carbohydrates and proteins that are
not soluble in ethanol); and (b) a subsequent liquid–liquid
extraction (1:1 hexane/water) to remove nonpolar compounds (such as
chlorophyll) from the sample. The cleaning step was intended to remove
coextracted compounds that would present interference during analysis
of the samples.
Once the solvent system was selected, apple
pomace extractions
were carried out under the same conditions as the preliminary extractions
that took place. Following the extraction, apple pomace extracts were
subjected to a liquid–liquid extraction (1:1 hexane/water)
to remove coextracted compounds and then rotaevaporated under reduced
pressure to prepare the samples for characterization.
Total
polyphenol content (TPC) was quantified by means of both
the Folin–Ciocalteu method and reversed-phase high performance
liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC).
For Folin–Ciocalteu
determination of TPC, the analysis was
carried out using the Folin–Ciocalteu method reported by Singleton21 in which a sample aliquot of 50 μL was
added to 3 mL of distilled water followed by 200 μL of Folin–Ciocalteu
reagent. Afterward, the test tubes were closed, thoroughly mixed,
and kept sheltered from light for 10 min. Once the 10 min were over,
600 μL of 5% (w/v) sodium carbonate solution were added, closing
the test tubes and mixing completely. The test tubes were submerged
in an isothermal bath with the temperature set to 37 °C during
15 min. After the reaction took place, they were removed from the
isothermal bath and placed in an ice bed for 15 min. The absorbance
was measured at 755 nm (Lambda 25 PerkinElmer spectrophotometer, Waltham,
MA, USA) and reported as gallic acid equivalents (GAE).21
TPC, as well as the determination of polyphenols
present compared
with existing standards, was carried out by HPLC. Five milliliter
samples were dried under reduced pressure and recovered using 5 mL
of acidified water (with 1% formic acid). Samples were filtered directly
onto 2 mL of Type 1 borosilicate glass vials using a 0.45-μm
nylon membrane. The analysis was carried out using an Agilent 1100
Series HPLC (Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with a Diode Array Detector
using a reversed phase (RP) column (ZORBAX SB-C18 Solvent Saver 3.0
× 250 mm; Germany) and a guard column of the same material, operated
at 30 °C, flow rate of 0.3 mL/min with a 65-min gradient (water-formic
acid 1% (v/v)(Solvent “A”)/acetonitrile-formic acid
1% (v/v) (Solvent “B”)) and a return to initial conditions
over 10 min. The gradient was as follows: Linear gradient from 100%
A to 90% A in 8 min. 90% A for 2 min. Linear gradient from 90% A to
80% A from minute 10 to minute 23. Linear gradient from 80% A to 70%
A for 7 min. Linear gradient from 70% A to 60% A for 15 min. Linear
gradient from 60% A to 20% A for 5 min. Linear gradient from 20% A
to 100% B in 5 min. 100% B from minute 55 to 60 and a return to 100%
A for minute 65.22
Total phenolic
compounds were quantified at 280 nm, while the distinction
between families of polyphenols was done based on the chromatographic
signal of each compound, the UV spectrum, and the available standards.
Phenolic acids were quantified based on their absorbance at the 320-nm
signal. The compounds that showed a higher signal at 360 nm were counted
as flavonols. This quantification was completed with the remaining
compounds that presented a stronger signal at 280 nm. TPC, phenolic
acid content, and flavonol content were reported as epicatechin equivalents
(mg/L), GAEs (mg/L), and rutin equivalents (mg/L), respectively.
The identification of the remaining compounds present in the apple
pomace for which a standard was not available was done by HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS
(Thermo Scientific LCQ Fleet Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer System). Chromatographic
separation was achieved at 30 °C, 20 μL injection volume,
and 0.25 mL/min flow rate, with a gradient of water–formic
acid 1% (v/v) (Solvent “A”)/acetonitrile–formic
acid 1% (v/v)(Solvent “B”). The elution gradient was
adapted from the previously described gradient: Linear gradient from
95% A to 90% A in 8 min. 90% A for 2 min. Linear gradient from 90%
A to 80% A from minute 10 to minute 23. Linear gradient from 80% A
to 70% A from minute 23 to 30. Liner gradient from 70% A to 60% A
for 15 min. Linear gradient from 60% A to 20% A for 5 min. Linear
gradient from 20% A to 100% B in 5 min. 100% B from minute 55 to 60
and a return to 100% A for minute 65. Initial conditions were then
re-established over a 10-min postrun. Identification of the compounds
was performed by MS. The mass spectrometer was operated in the negative
ion mode in the range of m/z 150–2000
and under the following conditions: source voltage, 4.5 kV; capillary
voltage, 23.5 V; capillary temperature, 250 °C.
In order
to estimate the mean degree of polymerization (mDP) of
the samples, phloroglucinolysis was carried out as established by
Kennedy23 and further analyzed by HPLC.
Preliminary studies
were performed to determine which of the proposed solvent systems
was to be used for further extractions. Frozen skins (either from
unripe or ripe apples) were milled with S1 or S2 in order to minimize
oxidation of the compounds.24 The tested
solvents were evaluated based on the TPC of each extract (Table 1). Results were expressed
as g per 100 g of fresh weight (FW).
sampleTPC Folin-CiocalteuTPC HPLCphenolic Acids HPLCflavonoids HPLCsamples extracted
with 80–20%
EtOH-water/acetic acid 5% (S1)unripe0.44 ± 0.010.48 ± 0.070.06 ± 0.010.06 ± 0.02ripe0.61 ± 0.101.21 ± 0.000.100.15 ± 0.01samples extracted with 20–80%
EtOH-water/acetic acid 5% (S2)unripe0.33 ± 0.070.41 ± 0.120.06 ± 0.010.07 ± 0.02ripe0.34 ± 0.0010.57 ±
0.010.05 ± 0.0010.07 ± 0.01
Results are expressed in g per 100
g FW.
Phenolic acids were
expressed in GAEs since the equivalent is usually
used for Folin–Ciocalteu and it would ease the comparative.
Total phenolic content was expressed in epicatechin equivalents, as
it better represents the nature of the sample (seeing that it is the
main polyphenol present); and total flavonoid content was expressed
in rutin equivalents (see Supporting Information).
As shown in Table 1, out of the samples tested, the two extracts with the best
results
were those coming from ripe apples (for the chromatogram, please see Supporting Information). However, the higher
TPC was obtained by extracting ripe apple skins with S1 (1.21 g per
100 g of FW) versus the 0.57 g per 100 g of FW extracted with S2.
It also presented a higher concentration of both phenolic acids (0.10
g per 100 g FW) and flavonoids (0.15 g per 100 g FW). Therefore, S1
was selected as the solvent system for further extractions.
Unriped apple skin presented 75.81 ± 0.05% humidity, while
the humidity content of ripe apple skin was 76.01 ± 0.44%.
Based on
the results from the preliminary studies, apple pomace was extracted
with S1. 100 g samples were extracted with 250 mL of solvent in a
solid–liquid extraction. The extracts were then concentrated
under reduced pressure to a volume of 100 mL followed by two cleaning
steps: (a) cold ethanol precipitation (to remove sugars, proteins,
and other polar compounds) and (b) a subsequent liquid–liquid
extraction with 1:1 hexane/water to remove coextracted compounds (to
remove chlorophyll, lipids, and other nonpolar compounds).25,26
The resulting extract was enriched in polyphenols and was
analyzed by HPLC in order to quantify TPC. In addition to this, the
precipitate obtained from the cold ethanol precipitation was redissolved
in acidified water (1% acetic acid) and analyzed by HPLC, in order
to quantify polyphenols that could have precipitated as well; the
hexane extract obtained after the liquid–liquid extraction
was also analyzed to ensure that there was no considerable loss of
polyphenolic compounds in both cleaning step (the chromatograms are
available in the Supporting Information).
Table 2 shows
the
TPC values on the samples along with the ethanol precipitation and
the hexane fraction.
sampleTPC HPLCflavonols
HPLCphenolic extract0.56 ± 0.010.28 ± 0.01ethanol precipitation0.01 ± 0.02 hexane fraction0.05
± 0.01 
Results are expressed
in g per 100
g of apple pomace.
Apple
pomace extract had a TPC of 0.56 g of polyphenols per 100
g of apple pomace FW and a flavonol concentration of 0.28 g per 100
g of apple pomace FW. No chromatographic signal was detected in the
520 nm wavelength, indicating the absence of anthocyanin-like compounds.
The humidity content present in the samples was 86.44 ± 0.86%.
Golden delicious pomace was obtained from the industrial production
of apple juice. It has been reported that after pressing only a small
amount of polyphenols is released into the juice. As a result, a large
fraction of the compounds remains present in the pomace, since it
is made of skin, seeds, and pulp residues.27,28 In addition to this, the difference in TPC between apple skin and
apple pomace can be attributed to the fact that some of the polyphenolic
compounds are located inside specific tissues of the fruit, making
the phenolic profile dependent on the parts of the fruit being analyzed.29
An HPLC analysis was carried out in order to
identify the main polyphenols present in the apple pomace. The identification
was made either by use of a standard or by a UV–vis spectrum. Figure 1 presents the HPLC
chromatogram of polyphenols in samples from commercial apple. The
identified peaks belong to gallic acid, chlorogenic acid, epicatechin,
caffeic acid, and quercetin, respectively.
Chromatogram (at 280
nm) of main polyphenols present in samples
from commercial apple pomace (M. domestica) extracted with solvent system 80–20% ethanol–water/acetic
acid 5% (S1). Peaks are as follows: 1 – gallic acid; 2 –
chlorogenic acid; 3 – PC B2; 4 – epicatechin; 5 –
caffeic acid; 6 – hyperin; 7 – isoquercetin; 8 –
avicularin; 9 – quercitrin; 10 – cynaroside; 11 –
phloretin; 12 – phloridzin; 13 – quercetin.
The peaks located between RT (retention time) 23 min and
RT 28
min could not be identified by standard or UV–vis spectra.
However, they displayed a maximum signal at 360 nm, indicating that
they might belong to the flavonol family (quercetin glycosides).
Since the identification of compounds by means of HPLC is limited
to the characteristic UV–vis spectrum and the availability
of standards, polyphenolic profiling was carried out by HPLC-MS, as
well as the confirmation of the already identified compounds.
The use of
HPLC-MS was fundamental for the polyphenolic profiling
since HPLC with UV–vis detection has its limitations with respect
to the identification of coeluted phenolic compounds and is not a
chromatographic technique which can provide molecular structure information.16Table 3 presents the tentatively identified polyphenolic compounds
along with their molecular formula and molecular ion (negative ionization
mode). The tentatively identified compounds can be seen in Figure 1.
 compoundtype of phenolicλmax (nm)m/z [M – H]−retention time RT (min)percentage of total area (%)1gallic acidphenolic
acid2701693.752.402chlorogenic acidphenolic acid242, 32435312.819.863PC B2flavanol238, 28057714.470.884epicatechinflavanol27828915.2838.735caffeic acidphenolic
acid216, 32417915.942.516Hyperinflavonol255, 35546320.3013.807isoquercetinflavonol260, 35446320.542.958avicularinflavonol258, 35943321.641.109quercitrinflavonol255, 35544722.064.0310cynarosideflavone239, 269, 34044722.484.5611phloretindihydrochalcone28627322.970.4212phloridzinphenolic acid28843523.240.7313quercetinflavonol37030123.913.61
The previously tentatively
identified compounds were confirmed
by matching the m/z value to the
molecular weight and the retention time established by available standards.
The presence of phloridzin is characteristic in apple pomaces but
is known to be absent in pomaces of other fruit sources.30 It is of particular interest due to its use
as a pigment by enzymatic oxidation and its ability as an antidiabetic
agent30,31 and for being one of the most stable phytochemicals
present in apple pomaces.32
To determine whether
proanthocyanidins were present, an extract from apple peels was subjected
to phloroglucinolysis. Phloroglucinolysis is based on the acid-catalyzed
rupture of the interflavanic bond (IB) that links together the constitutive
subunits of proanthocyanidiǹs constitutive subunits. The cleavage
of the IB leads to the release of a terminal subunit in addition to
the formation of an adduct between phloroglucinol and the upper subunit.23
The formation of the epicatechin–phloroglucinol
adduct (see the Supporting Information for
the chromatogram) allowed the estimation of an mDp of 2.47. This not
only indicates that the extract contains proanthocyanidins but also
specifies the type B nature of the IB, since type A bonds are not
susceptible to IB cleavage, maintaining their terminal subunit and,
therefore, preventing the coupling of the nucleophilic agent and the
upper subunit from happening.
The solvents for
the experimental section were chosen from those typically employed
(ethanol, methanol, ethyl acetate) for polyphenolic extractions from
vegetable sources.33 The phenolic content
extracted is dependent on the solvent used. As such, phenols with
a low molecular weight, phenolic acids, and flavonoid aglycons can
be extracted with ethyl acetate. However, in addition to the aforementioned
compounds, aqueous alcoholic mixtures (which possess a higher polarity)
are used to extract high molecular weight phenols and flavonoid glycosides
which, in turn, is reflected in the TPC of the extract.34,35
The milling of the frozen skins was done after the addition
of the solvents, in order to minimize oxidation of the compounds as
ethanol has proven to decrease polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity.24 It has been shown that polyphenol antioxidant
capacity can be diminished due to enzymes present within the fruit
that are released after the cell wall is damaged. It was previously
reported that the higher the polyphenol content is, the higher the
enzymatic oxidation catalyzed by PPO can be.28,36,37 As has been shown before by van der Sluis
et al.,38 epicatechin and chlorogenic acid
are the main compounds that present a decrease in total concentration
due to the action of PPO (up to 28 and 25%, respectively). However,
a positive effect was noted regarding total quercetin glycosides (a
17% increase).38
As depicted in Table 1, the fact that the
two extracts with the higher TPC that were from
ripe apples are in agreement with the nature of apple pomace, which
is obtained after the pressing of mature apples for juice production.
Aside solvent
type, sample–solvent ratio, and extraction time, other factors
that affect the yield of polyphenols present in the extracts are temperature
(as polyphenols are thermolabile and can easily undergo degradation),
pH (a variable that directly affects the structure of some polyphenolic
compounds), part of the plant, and particle size39 The latter is the reason behind the milling of the apple
pomace, in order to homogenize the particle size as much as possible.
While various apple cultivars can present a TPC that ranges between
76 and 134 mg/100 g FW when extracted with 80% water/ethanol,40 66.2 to 211.9 mg/100 g FW,38 TPC exhibited by Golden Delicious extracts were 86.30 mg/100
g fresh fruit when extracted with 70% acetone–30% water.41 Apple pomaces have been reported to have a remaining
polyphenol concentration of between 2.19 ± 0.09 and 4.59 ±
0.47 mg GAE/g dry weight when extracted with 70% methanol–30%
water at (60 ± 2 °C) during 30 min,42 while Golden Delicious pomace 2.87 ± 0.75 mg GAE/g powder and
3.05 ± 0.82 mg GAE/g powder when extracted with ethanol and methanol,
respectively.43 This is because the majority
of polyphenols can be found in the skin, remaining in the pomace.
When comparing results, it should be taken into consideration whether
they are expressed in FW or dry weight, as this can be interpreted
as an increase in the amount of polyphenols present due to the loss
of humidity.
Moreover, the differences that can be observed
within the various
polyphenolic profiles depend not only on the solvent system used (solvent
acidity is known to hydrolyze cellulose and pectin, helping release
the polyphenols embedded in the matrix)44 but also on the cultivar of apple analyzed (apples intended for
cider-making have a higher TPC than apples for human consumption),3,15 the conditions under which the fruit grew,39,45 whether or not the crop was fertilized,46 the part of the apple being used,47 how
it was processed, stored, as well as the stage of maturity.
In regard to the coextraction of other molecules which do not show
any interest for the purpose of this work, the sample pretreatment
can be considered an important preparation step, as coextracted compounds
(mainly lipidic and nonpolar compounds) can interfere with polyphenol
quantification.16
The major constituents of apple and apple pomace are reported to
be chlorogenic acid, epicatechin, quercetin-3-O-glucoside, quercitrin,
phloridzin, and quercetin,40 hyperin, avicularin,
and rutin (were also found in M. domestica var. rayada, another apple variety cultivated in Mexico)48 all present in the pomace subject of this study.
The established polyphenolic profile is in agreement with previously
reported findings38 that described that
chlorogenic acid and phloridzin can be found in both peel and pulp,
while quercetin glycosides and epicatechin are mostly present in apple
skin (even though they can be found in lower concentrations within
the pulp). Caffeic acid, catechin, some quercetin glycosides and rutin
are some other polyphenols that can be extracted from apple pomace.3,15
In total, 12 compounds were identified during the polyphenolic
profiling of apple pomace from M. domestica Golden Delicious variety, among them gallic acid, chlorogenic acid,
epicatechin, caffeic acid, and quercetin. This was achieved by means
of HPLC (with both standards and UV–vis spectra) and HPLC-DAD/ESI-MS.
The polyphenolic profiling deemed apple pomace as a suitable source
of phenolic compounds and a possible economically interesting alternative
to waste disposal of an otherwise underutilized residue with a potentially
negative environmental impact.
The author’s
would like to thank the Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Autónoma de Chihuahua (UACH), and the Departamento de Medio
Ambiente y Energía, Centro de Investigación en Materiales
Avanzados (CIMAV) for allowing this work to be excecuted within their
facilities.
coronary
heart disease
neurodegenerative diseases
cardiovascular diseases
ultrasound assisted extraction
high performance
liquid chromatography
total polyphenol content
reversed-phase high performance
liquid chromatography
gallic acid equivalents
reversed phase
reversed-phase high
performance liquid chromatography equipped with a Diode Array Detector/Electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry
mean degree of polymerization
fresh weight
retention time
interflavanic bond
polyphenol oxidase
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.3c03218.
Chromatogram (at 280 nm)
of sample from ripe apple skin
extractions; calibration curves for the three different quantifications;
chromatograms of TPC (at 280 nm) of precipitate from cold ethanol
precipitation and subsequent liquid–liquid extraction; chromatogram
(at 280 nm) of sample from commercial apple pomace after phloroglucinolysis
(PDF)
Conceptualization,
E.S. and L.B.-C.; methodology, E.S., L.A.O.-F., L.B.-C., and G.G.-S.;
formal analysis, B.R.-G. and M.D.R.P.-P.; resources, E.S., L.B.-C.,
and G.G.-S.; data curation, L.A.O.-F.; writing—original draft,
L.A.O.-F.; writing—review and editing, E.S. and L.B.-C.; supervision,
G.G.-S., B.R.-G., and M.D.R.P.-P.; project administration, L.B.-C.;
funding acquisition, L.B.-C., and E.S. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
The authors would
like to thank the Mexican National Council for Science and Technology
(CONACyT, Mexico) for financial support of a student via a doctoral
scholarship (number 306675).
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Published
as part of ACS Omegavirtual special issue “Phytochemistry”.
ao3c03218_si_001.pdf
ao3c03218_si_001.pdf