{"priorityDate": [], "filingDate": [], "publicationDate": [], "assigneeOriginal": []}
Claims ClaimsThe embodiments of the invention in which an exclusive property or privilege is claimed are defined as follows: 1. A process for isolating a caffeme-free mixture of catechins from any plant material that contains catechins and which may contain caffeine, comprising 1 contacting the plant material for a selected period of time with a first solvent whereby at least some of said catechins are soluble and transported into said first solvent, and said first solvent forms a crude extract; loading said crude extract onto a first column wherein said column contains a first adsorbent for specifically adsorbing said catechins; washing said first adsorbent with a first wash solution, wherein caffeine is removed and wherein said catechins remain adsorbed to said adsorbent, and desorbing said catechins from said adsorbent using a first eluent wherein a caffeme- free mixture catechins is isolated. 2 The method of claim 1, wherein the first eluent is 100% ethanol and said caffeme-free mixture catechins comprises 30% EGCG and wherein the purity of said catechins is 70-80%. 3. The method of claim 1 wherein said first eluent is 55% ethanol, and wherein small fractions of said eluent are collected and combined based on the composition of said fractions, wherein a caffeine-free mixture of catechins is isolated comprising 60-75% EGCG and wherein the purity of said catechins is 78-82%. 4. The method of claim 3 further comprising: loading said caffeme-free mixture of catechins onto a second column, wherein said second column comprises a second absorbent; and eluting said caffeine-free mixture of catechins using second and third eluents to obtain a caffeine-free mixture of catechins comprising 85-95% EGCG. 5. The method of claim 4 further comprising. loading said caffeme-free mixture of catechins from isolated from said second column onto a solvent exchange column; eluting said caffeme-free catechins from said solvent exchange column with methanol, removing said methanol from said caffeme-free mixture catechins eluted from said solvent exchange column; and 6. The method of claim 1, wherein said first adsorbent is a reverse phase matrix. 7. The method of claim 6, wherein said reverse phase matrix is polyamide. 8. The method of claim 1- wherein said first wash solution comprises water containing between 0 and 10% ethanol. 9. The method of claim 4, wherein said second eluent comprises 5% EtOH. 10. The method of claim 4, wherein said third eluent comprises 12% EtOH. 11. The method of claim 4, wherein said second adsorbent is a reverse phase matrix. 12. The method of claim 11, wherein said reverse phase matrix is C-l 8. 13. The method of claim 5, wherein said solvent exchange column comprises polyamide. 14. The method of claim 5, wherein said caffeine-free catechin is crystallized from 1% methanol/water. 15. The method of claim 1, wherein said plant material comprises green tea leaves. 16. Caffeine-free catechins obtained by the method of claim 1. 17. Caffeine-free catechins obtained by the method of claim 2. 18. Caffeine-free catechins obtained by the method of claim 3. 19. Caffeine-free catechins obtained by the method of claim 4. 20. Highly pure, caffeine-free EGCG isolated by the method of claim 5. 21. Caffeine-free catechins comprising 98% EGCG. 22. A method of treating cancer comprising acJn-inistering an effective amount of highly pure, caffeine-free EGCG isolated from the method of claim 5. 23. Pharmaceutical compositions containing EGCG isolated by the method of claim 5. 24. Cosmetic compositions containing EGCG isolated by the method of claim 4.