{"priorityDate": [], "filingDate": [], "publicationDate": [], "assigneeOriginal": []}
Claims ( 50 ) The invention claimed is: 1. A method for protecting premature aging of the skin by modulating production and release of proinflammatory epidermal cytokines, said method comprising administering to a human in need thereof a pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition comprising: a standardized extract of Centella asiatica that comprises at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract prepared by a process comprising the steps of: a) creating a first extract by exposing the parts of Centella asiatica that are above ground to an alcoholic solvent to obtain an alcoholic solution; b) passing the alcoholic solution obtained in step a), over an anionic resin to obtain an aqueous-alcoholic eluate; c) selectively defatting the aqueous-alcoholic eluate obtained in step b) by liquid/liquid extraction to obtain a defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase; d) concentrating the defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase obtained in step c) using successive filtration to obtain an aqueous phase; e) passing the aqueous phase obtained in step d), over a cationic resin and then over an anionic resin; f) stabilizing the aqueous phase obtained in step e) by adding alcohol to obtain a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside; and g) standardizing the mixture obtained in step f), by adding an appropriate amount of a second extract of Centella asiatica having more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of said second extract, so that the final extract obtained has at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract; and a pharmaceutically or cosmetically acceptable carrier. 2. The method of claim 1 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the extract. 3. The method of claim 2 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 4. The method of claim 3 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 5. The method of claim 1 , wherein the mass ratio of asiaticoside to madecassoside and terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 5:95 and 25:75. 6. The method of claim 1 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 30:70 and 70:30. 7. The method of claim 6 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 40:60 and 60:40. 8. A method for inhibiting inflammatory disorders associated with premature aging of the skin by modulating production and release of proinflammatory epidermal cytokines, said method comprising administering to a human in need thereof a pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition comprising: a standardized extract of Centella asiatica that comprises at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract prepared by a process comprising the steps of: a) creating a first extract by exposing the parts of Centella asiatica that are above ground to an alcoholic solvent to obtain an alcoholic solution; b) passing the alcoholic solution obtained in step a), over an anionic resin to obtain an aqueous-alcoholic eluate; c) selectively defatting the aqueous-alcoholic eluate obtained in step b) by liquid/liquid extraction to obtain a defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase; d) concentrating the defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase obtained in step c) using successive filtration to obtain an aqueous phase; e) passing the aqueous phase obtained in step d), over a cationic resin and then over an anionic resin; f) stabilizing the aqueous phase obtained in step e) by adding alcohol to obtain a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside; and g) standardizing the mixture obtained in step f), by adding an appropriate amount of a second extract of Centella asiatica having more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of said second extract, so that the final extract obtained has at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract; and a pharmatically or cosmetically acceptable carrier. 9. The method of claim 8 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the extract. 10. The method of claim 9 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 11. The method of claim 10 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 12. The method of claim 8 , wherein the mass ratio of asiaticoside to madecassoside and terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 5:95 and 25:75. 13. The method of claim 8 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 30:70 and 70:30. 14. The method of claim 13 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 40:60 and 60:40. 15. A method for inhibiting inflammatory disorders associated with photo-induced aging of the skin by modulating production and release of proinflammatory epidermal cytokines, said method comprising administering to a human in need thereof a pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition comprising: a standardized extract of Centella asiatica that comprises at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract prepared by a process comprising the steps of: a) creating a first extract by exposing the parts of Centella asiatica that are above ground to an alcoholic solvent to obtain an alcoholic solution; b) passing the alcoholic solution obtained in step a), over an anionic resin to obtain an aqueous-alcoholic eluate; c) selectively defatting the aqueous-alcoholic eluate obtained in step b) by liquid/liquid extraction to obtain a defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase; d) concentrating the defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase obtained in step c) using successive filtration to obtain an aqueous phase; e) passing the aqueous phase obtained in step d), over a cationic resin and then over an anionic resin; f) stabilizing the aqueous phase obtained in step e) by adding alcohol to obtain a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside; and g) standardizing the mixture obtained in step f), by adding an appropriate amount of a second extract of Centella asiatica having more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of said second extract, so that the final extract obtained has at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract; and a pharmaceutically or cosmetically acceptable carrier. 16. The method of claim 15 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the extract. 17. The method of claim 16 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 18. The method of claim 17 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 19. The method of claim 15 , wherein the mass ratio of asiaticoside to madecassoside and terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 5:95 and 25:75. 20. The method of claim 15 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 30:70 and 70:30. 21. The method of claim 20 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 40:60 and 60:40. 22. A method for protecting accelerated aging of the skin by modulation production and release of proinflammatory epidermal cytokines, said method comprising administering to a human in need thereof a pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition comprising: a standardized extract of Centella asiatica that comprises at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract prepared by a process comprising the steps of: a) creating a first extract by exposing the parts of Centella asiatica that are above ground to an alcoholic solvent to obtain an alcoholic solution; b) passing the alcoholic solution obtained in step a), over an anionic resin to obtain an aqueous-alcoholic eluate; c) selectively defatting the aqueous-alcoholic eluate obtained in step b) by liquid/liquid extraction to obtain a defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase; d) concentrating the defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase obtained in step c) using successive filtration to obtain an aqueous phase; e) passing the aqueous phase obtained in step d), over a cationic resin and then over an anionic resin; f) stabilizing the aqueous phase obtained in step e) by adding alcohol to obtain a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside; and g) standardizing the mixture obtained in step f), by adding an appropriate amount of a second extract of Centella asiatica having more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of said second extract, so that the final extract obtained has at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract; and a pharmaceutically or cosmetically acceptable carrier. 23. The method of claim 22 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the extract. 24. The method of claim 23 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 25. The method of claim 24 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 26. The method of claim 22 , wherein the mass ratio of asiaticoside to madecassoside and terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 5:95 and 25:75. 27. The method of claim 22 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 30:70 and 70:30. 28. The method of claim 27 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 40:60 and 60:40. 29. A method for inhibiting inflammatory disorders associated with accelerated aging of the skin by modulating production and release of proinflammatory epidermal cytokines, said method comprising administering to a human in need thereof a pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition comprising: a standardized extract of Centella asiatica that comprises at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract prepared by a process comprising the steps of: a) creating a first extract by exposing the parts of Centella asiatica that are above ground to an alcoholic solvent to obtain an alcoholic solution; b) passing the alcoholic solution obtained in step a), over an anionic resin to obtain an aqueous-alcoholic eluate; c) selectively defatting the aqueous-alcoholic eluate obtained in step b) by liquid/liquid extraction to obtain a defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase; d) concentrating the defatted aqueous-alcoholic phase obtained in step c) using successive filtration to obtain an aqueous phase; e) passing the aqueous phase obtained in step d), over a cationic resin and then over an anionic resin; f) stabilizing the aqueous phase obtained in step e) by adding alcohol to obtain a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside; and g) standardizing the mixture obtained in step f), by adding an appropriate amount of a second extract of Centella asiatica having more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of said second extract, so that the final extract obtained has at least 75 wt % of a mixture of madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the final extract; and a pharmaceutically or cosmetically acceptable carrier. 30. The method of claim 29 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside, terminoloside and asiaticoside relative to the total weight of the extract. 31. The method of claim 30 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 85 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 32. The method of claim 31 , wherein the standardized extract of Centella asiatica comprises more than 95 wt % of a mixture comprising madecassoside and terminoloside relative to the total weight of the extract. 33. The method of claim 29 , wherein the mass ratio of asiaticoside to madecassoside and terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 5:95 and 25:75. 34. The method of claim 29 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 30:70 and 70:30. 35. The method of claim 34 , wherein the mass ratio of madecassoside to terminoloside in the standardized extract is between 40:60 and 60:40. 36. The method of claim 1 , wherein said proinlfammatory epidermal cytokines are selected from the group consisting essentially of IL-1α, IL-8, PGE-2 and TNF-α. 37. The method of claim 1 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered topically. 38. The method of claim 1 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered at a concentration of at least about 1 mg/mL. 39. The method of claim 8 , wherein said proinlfammatory epidermal cytokines are selected from the group consisting essentially of IL-1α, IL-8, PGE-2 and TNF-α. 40. The method of claim 8 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered topically. 41. The method of claim 8 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered at a concentration of at least about 1 mg/mL. 42. The method of claim 15 , wherein said proinlfammatory epidermal cytokines are selected from the group consisting essentially of IL-1α, IL-8, PGE-2 and TNF-α. 43. The method of claim 15 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered topically. 44. The method of claim 15 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered at a concentration of at least about 1 mg/mL. 45. The method of claim 22 , wherein said proinflammatory epidermal cytokines are selected from the group consisting essentially of IL-1α, IL-8, PGE-2 and TNF-α. 46. The method of claim 22 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered topically. 47. The method of claim 22 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered at a concentration of at least about 1 mg/mL. 48. The method of claim 29 , wherein said proinflammatory epidermal cytokines are selected from the group consisting essentially of IL-1α, IL-8, PGE-2 and TNF-α. 49. The method of claim 29 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered topically. 50. The method of claim 29 , wherein said pharmaceutical or cosmetic composition is administered at a concentration of at least about 1 mg/mL.