{"priorityDate": [], "filingDate": [], "publicationDate": [], "assigneeOriginal": []}
Claims WE CLAIM: 1. A method for purifying Mogroside V comprises passing a solution of a pre-prepared Siraitia grosvenori primary extract through a multi-column system including a plurality of columns, in series, packed with a porous adsorbent resin to provide at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides and eluting fractions with Mogroside V content from the at least one column having absorbed mogrosides to provide an eluted solution with Mogroside V content (an intermediate Mogroside V extract). 2. The method of claim 1 wherein plurality is at least two columns. 3. The method of claim 1 wherein plurality is at least three columns 4. The method of claim 1 wherein plurality is four two columns. 5. The method of claim 1 wherein pre-prepared Siraitia grosvenori primary extract is prepared by i) providing fruit of the Siraitia grosvenori plant, ii) washing and mashing the fruit (while removing seeds) to produce mashed fruit, iii) saccharifying the mashed fruit to hydrolyze the polysaccharides, extracting the saccharified matter, filtering and concentrating an extract, and iv) centrifuging the extract, such extract being preparable for passage, as a feed liquor, through the plurality of columns, in series, packed with a porous adsorbent resin. 6. The method of claim 1 which comprises further processing of the intermediate Mogroside V extract to remove one or more of colour, salt and impurities by a means selected from the group comprising membrane filtration, ion exchange chromatography and activated carbon treatment, or any combinations thereof. 7. The method of claim 6 additionally comprising evaporating and concentrating by the intermediate Mogroside V extract via passage thorugh at least one nanofilter or ultrafilter, followed by drying. 8. A natural extract comprising Mogroside V, which is extracted and purified from Siraitia grosvenori according to the methods of claims 1-7. 9. A natural sweetener composition comprising extracts of Mogroside V, which is extracted and purified from Siraitia grosvenori according to the methods of claims 1-7. 10. Foods comprising extracts of Mogroside V, which is extracted and purified from Siraitia grosvenori according to the methods of claims 1 -7 11. Beverages comprising extracts of Mogroside V, which is extracted and purified from Siraitia grosvenori according to the methods of claims 1-7 12. Nutraceuticals comprising extracts of Mogroside V, which is extracted and purified from Siraitia grosvenori according to the methods of claims 1-7. 13. A method for purifying Mogroside V comprises: (a) passing a primary solution comprising mogrosides through a multi-column system including a plurality of columns in series packed with an adsorbent resin to provide at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides; (b) removing impurities from the multi-column system; and (c) eluting fractions with high Mogroside V content from the at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides to provide an eluted solution with high Mogroside V content. 14. A method for purifying Mogroside V comprises: • °(a) passing a primary solution comprising mogrosides through a multi-column system including a plurality of columns in series packed with an adsorbent resin to provide at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides; °(b) eluting fractions with high Mogroside V content from the at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides to provide an eluted solution with Mogroside V content; °(c) decolorizing the eluted solution with Mogroside V content to provide a first adsorption solution; and 

 °(d) removing the alcoholic solvent from the first adsorption solution and passing the remaining solution through a column with a macroporous adsorbent to provide a second adsorption solution. 15. A method for purifying Mogroside V comprises: • °(a) passing a primary extract solution comprising of mogrosides through a multi-column system including a plurality of columns in series packed with an adsorbent resin to provide at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides; °(b) removing impurities from the multi-column system; °(c) eluting fractions with Mogroside V content from the at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides to provide an eluted solution with Mogroside V content; °(d) decolorizing the eluted solution with Mogroside V content to provide a first adsorption solution; and °(e) removing the alcoholic solvent from the first adsorption solution and passing the remaining solution through a column with a macroporous adsorbent to provide a second adsorption solution. 16. A method for purifying Mogroside V comprises: • °(a) passing a primary solution comprising mogrosides through a multi-column system including a plurality of columns packed with an adsorbent resin, to provide at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides; °(b) eluting fractions with Mogroside V content from the at least one column having adsorbed mogrosides to provide an eluted solution with Mogroside V content; and °(c) deionizing the solution.