Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults | Cochrane Skip to main content English Español فارسی Français Русский Hrvatski Deutsch Bahasa Malaysia ไทย 繁體中文 简体中文 More languages Fewer languages About Cochrane translations Log in Cochrane Library Search form Search About us Our evidence What are systematic reviews? Why our evidence is trusted Get involved Learn Products and services For authors Toggle navigation Toggle search Filters Close search ✖ Filters Evidence Our evidence Exclude our evidence Handbooks/Manuals Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Methodological Expectations of Cochrane Intervention Reviews (MECIR) Cochrane Style Manual News News Exclude news Breadcrumb Home Our evidence Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults Also available in English Español فارسی Français Русский Hrvatski Português 日本語 Bahasa Malaysia ไทย 繁體中文 Polski 한국어 Green tea has a long history of many uses, one of which is helping overweight people to lose weight and to maintain weight loss. Believed to be able to increase a person's energy output, green tea weight loss preparations are extracts of green tea that contain a higher concentration of ingredients (catechins and caffeine) than the typical green tea beverage prepared from a tea bag and boiling water. This review looked at 15 weight loss studies and three studies measuring weight maintenance where some form of a green tea preparation was given to one group and results compared to a group receiving a control. Neither group knew whether they were receiving the green tea preparation or the control. A total of 1945 participants completed the studies, ranging in length from 12 to 13 weeks. In summary, the loss in weight in adults who had taken a green tea preparation was statistically not significant, was very small and is not likely to be clinically important. Similar results were found in studies that used other ways to measure loss in weight (body mass index, waist circumference). Studies examining the effect of green tea preparations on weight maintenance did not show any benefit compared to the use of a control preparation. Most adverse effects, such as nausea, constipation, abdominal discomfort and increased blood pressure, were judged to be mild to moderate and to be unrelated to the green tea or control intervention. No deaths were reported, although adverse events required hospitalisation. One study attempted to look at health-related quality of life by asking participants about their attitudes towards eating. Nine studies tracked participants' compliance with green tea preparations. Studies did not include any information about the effects of green tea preparations on morbidity, costs or patient satisfaction. Read the full abstract Background Preparations of green tea are used as aids in weight loss and weight maintenance. Catechins and caffeine, both contained in green tea, are each believed to have a role in increasing energy metabolism, which may lead to weight loss. A number of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating the role of green tea in weight loss have been published; however, the efficacy of green tea preparations in weight loss remains unclear. Objectives To assess the efficacy and safety of green tea preparations for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Search strategy We searched the following databases from inception to specified date as well as reference lists of relevant articles: The
Cochrane Library (Issue 12, 2011), MEDLINE (December 2011), EMBASE (December 2011), CINAHL (January 2012), AMED (January 2012), Biological Abstracts (January 2012), IBIDS (August 2010), Obesity+ (January 2012), IPA (January 2012) and Web of Science (December 2011). Current Controlled Trials with links to other databases of ongoing trials was also searched. Selection criteria RCTs of at least 12 weeks' duration comparing green tea preparations to a control in overweight or obese adults. Data collection and analysis Three authors independently extracted data, assessed studies for risk of bias and quality, with differences resolved by consensus. Heterogeneity of included studies was assessed visually using forest plots and quantified using the I 2 statistic. We synthesised data using meta-analysis and descriptive analysis as appropriate; subgroup and sensitivity analyses were conducted. Adverse effects reported in studies were recorded. Main results Due to the level of heterogeneity among studies, studies were divided into two groups; those conducted in Japan and those conducted outside Japan. Study length ranged between 12 and 13 weeks. Meta-analysis of six studies conducted outside Japan showed a mean difference (MD) in weight loss of -0.04 kg (95% CI -0.5 to 0.4; P = 0.88; I 2 = 18%; 532 participants). The eight studies conducted in Japan were not similar enough to allow pooling of results and MD in weight loss ranged from -0.2 kg to -3.5 kg (1030 participants) in favour of green tea preparations. Meta-analysis of studies measuring change in body mass index (BMI) conducted outside Japan showed a MD in BMI of -0.2 kg/m 2 (95% CI -0.5 to 0.1; P = 0.21; I 2 = 38%; 222 participants). Differences among the eight studies conducted in Japan did not allow pooling of results and showed a reduction in BMI ranging from no effect to -1.3 kg/m 2 (1030 participants), in favour of green tea preparations over control. Meta-analysis of five studies conducted outside Japan and measuring waist circumference reported a MD of -0.2 cm (95% CI -1.4 to 0.9; P = 0.70; I 2 = 58%; 404 participants). Differences among the eight studies conducted in Japan did not allow pooling of results and showed effects on waist circumference ranging from a gain of 1 cm to a loss of 3.3 cm (1030 participants). Meta-analysis for three weight loss studies, conducted outside Japan, with waist-to-hip ratio data (144 participants) yielded no significant change (MD 0; 95% CI -0.02 to 0.01). Analysis of two studies conducted to determine if green tea could help to maintain weight after a period of weight loss (184 participants) showed a change in weight loss of 0.6 to -1.6 kg, a change in BMI from 0.2 to -0.5 kg/m 2 and a change in waist circumference from 0.3 to -1.7 cm. In the eight studies that recorded adverse events, four reported adverse events that were mild to moderate, with the exception of two (green tea preparations group) that required hospitalisation (reported as not associated with the intervention). Nine studies reported on compliance/adherence, one study assessed attitude towards eating as part of the health-related quality of life outcome. No studies reported on patient satisfaction, morbidity or cost. Authors' conclusions Green tea preparations appear to induce a small, statistically non-significant weight loss in overweight or obese adults. Because the amount of weight loss is small, it is not likely to be clinically important. Green tea had no significant effect on the maintenance of weight loss. Of those studies recording information on adverse events, only two identified an adverse event requiring hospitalisation. The remaining adverse events were judged to be mild to moderate. Citation Jurgens TM, Whelan AM, Killian L, Doucette S, Kirk S, Foy E. Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2021, Issue 6. Art. No.: CD008650. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008650.pub2. Authors Jurgens TM Whelan AM Killian L Doucette S Kirk S Foy E Published 1 July 2021 Full review on the Cochrane Library Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better health. 11-13 Cavendish Square London W1G 0AN United Kingdom Contact us News Press office About us Jobs Cochrane Library The Cochrane Collaboration is a charity (no. 1045921) and a company limited by guarantee (no. 03044323) registered in England & Wales. VAT registration number GB 718 2127 49. Copyright © 2026 The Cochrane Collaboration Website Terms & Conditions | Disclaimer | Privacy | Cookie policy | Cookie settings Our use of cookies We use necessary cookies to make our site work. We'd also like to set optional analytics cookies to help us improve it. We won't set optional cookies unless you enable them. Using this tool will set a cookie on your device to remember your preferences. You can always change your cookie preferences at any time by clicking on the 'Cookies settings' link in the footer of every page. For more detailed information about the cookies we use, see our Cookies page . Necessary cookies Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as security, network management, and accessibility. You may disable these by changing your browser settings, but this may affect how the website functions. Analytics We'd like to set cookies so we can analyse our website usage with Matomo , to help us to improve our website and content. The data is anonymised and not shared with any third party. For more information see our Cookies page . Accept all Configure Accept selected