Non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit: Consultation request to determine novel food status, pursuant to Article 4(2) of Retained Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Environment Food and farming Producing and distributing food Regulated products Non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit: Consultation request to determine novel food status, pursuant to Article 4(2) of Retained Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 Decision Non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit: Consultation request to determine novel food status, pursuant to Article 4(2) of Retained Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 Published 26 June 2024 Applies to England and Wales Contents 1. Name and description of the food concerned 2. Definition of novel food 3. Status 4. Reasons statement Print this page © Crown copyright 2024 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk . Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/non-selective-aqueous-decoctions-of-monk-fruit-consultation-request-to-determine-novel-food-status-pursuant-to-article-42-of-retained-regulation-eu-20/non-selective-aqueous-decoctions-of-monk-fruit-determination-of-the-status-of-a-novel-food-pursuant-to-article-42-of-assimilated-regulation-eu-2 UK Regulated Product (RP) number: 1311 1. Name and description of the food concerned Non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit (made from the fresh and dried fruit of the plant Siraitia grosvenorii) (this is not a labelling designation). 2. Definition of novel food Article 3(2)(a) of assimilated Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 defines ‘novel food’ as any food that was not used for human consumption to a significant degree within the European Union (EU) or the United Kingdom (UK) before 15 May 1997, irrespective of the dates of accession of Member States, and which falls into one of the categories at (i) to (x) of that provision. 3. Status The FSA determines that non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit (made from the fresh and dried fruit of the plant Siraitia grosvenorii) are not a novel food. 4. Reasons statement The FSA was provided with evidence of a history of consumption of non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit (made from the fresh and dried fruit of the plant Siraitia grosvenorii) within the UK and the EU. The evidence, considered in its totality, was deemed sufficient to demonstrate a significant history of consumption. Based on the evidence provided, the FSA has concluded that non-selective aqueous decoctions of monk fruit (made from the fresh and dried fruit of the plant Siraitia grosvenorii) are therefore not novel. This decision will be published on the FSA website and is applicable in England and Wales. Food Standards Scotland ( FSS ) will issue their own determination applicable in Scotland. 4.1 Windsor Framework In October 2023, the Windsor Framework was implemented providing a unique set of arrangements to support the flow of agrifood retail food products from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. These goods can meet the same standards applied in the rest of the United Kingdom (UK) in public health, marketing (including labelling) and organic foods when moving through the Northern Ireland Retail Movement Scheme (NIRMS). Under the NIRMS, eligible retail goods produced within GB will be able to be placed on the market in Northern Ireland. The FSA remains committed to ensuring that consumers across the UK can be confident that food is safe and is what it says it is, even where rules applicable to the same type of food may be slightly different. Back to top Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright