 
1 August 2015 - Food Safety Authority of Ireland 
 
SUBSTANTIAL EQUIVALENCE OPINION 
Cocoa Extract 
 
 
Introduction 
The Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI) received an application in March of 
2015 from Mars Symbioscience  of Maryland in the USA  for an opinion on the 
substantial equivalence of a low fat cocoa extract (Cocoa Via®) manufactured by the 
Cocoapro® process to a defatted natural cocoa powder under Article 3.4 of the novel 
food Regulation (EC) No  258/97. The applicant considers their cocoa extract to be 
novel in the EU and fall within the scope of the novel food Regulation (EC) No 
258/97, specifically the category set out in Article 1.2(e): “foods and food ingredients 
consisting of or isolated from plants, except foods and food i ngredients obtained by 
traditional propagating or breeding practices and having a history of safe food use”. 
To demonstrate substantial equivalence in line with Article 3.4  of the novel food 
Regulation, the low fat cocoa extract is compared to defatted nat ural cocoa powder 
also manufactured by Mars and currently marketed in the EU.  The cocoa extract, like 
its co mparator is not a significant contribut or of macro - or micro-nutrients to the 
average diet and this fact is used by the applicant to place any compo sitional or 
nutritional variations in context. The novel ingredient is intended as a n alternative  
source of cocoa flav anols to that already provided by Mars ’ cocoa powder and other 
foods and food supplements  in the EU . The production process for the cocoa extract 
and the cocoa powder by Mars is identical, except for the additional extraction step 
used to produce the cocoa extract. Processing is carried out to GMP standards and in 
accordance with HACCP principles. The applicant  uses Indonesian coc oa beans 
(Theobroma cacao L.), from which their Cocoapro® production process produces the 
defatted cocoa cake . The defatted cocoa cake is then either milled to produce cocoa 
powder or else extracted with aqueous acetone to produce the cocoa extract. 
Composition 
The specifications for the cocoa extract and cocoa powder  are provided along with 
detailed analytical compositional data. A few  differences are evident in the cocoa 
extract such as the presence of silicon dioxide (1% max.) as a processing aid  and the 
relatively higher content of caffeine, theobromine and flavanols . In addition, a slight 

 
2 August 2015 - Food Safety Authority of Ireland 
 
reduction is observed in the l evels of ash, protein, fat, dietary  fibre, iron, sodium and 
calcium. The higher level  of flavanols in the cocoa extract is an intentional  
consequence of the extraction step  which the applicant may separately seek to exploit 
in terms of a nutrition or health claim. The proposed uses and use levels of the cocoa 
extract should ensure that any compositional differences will not impact significantly 
on the ultimate intake of any of these constituents by consumers. In addition, because 
the cocoa extract and the cocoa powder are  insignificant contributors to the reference 
intakes for most of the constituents concerned, the observed variations are not 
considered significant from a nutritional perspective. The novel ingredient is stable in 
its original containers for a minimum of five years at temperatures between 10 and 
25°C and relative humidity of 80% or less. 
Nutritional Value and Metabolism 
Certain variation is evident in the levels of some nutrients in the cocoa extract 
compared to  those in the cocoa powder . While some of the  differences may seem 
significant in absolute or numerical terms, they are mitigated when recommended 
intake is taken into account . In addition,  none of the differences are expected to  
impact on the nutritional value of the cocoa extract compared to the cocoa powder as 
both will contribute minimally to the reference intakes as set out in Annex XIII of the 
FIC Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 . With composition and nutritional value 
considered to be equivalent, it therefore follows that metabolism of the cocoa extract 
would also be similar to that of the cocoa powder. 
Intended Uses 
The cocoa extract  is intended as an alternative  source of cocoa flava nols to Mars’ 
cocoa powder which is currently on the EU market. The applicant proposes to provide 
cocoa extract at  levels of up to  730 mg per serving (375  mg cocoa flavanols)  or 1.2 
g/day for use as a functional ingredient in foods and food supplements . They will 
advise that consumers should avoid consuming more than 600  mg of cocoa flavanols 
per day. 
Level of Undesirable Substances 
Mars’ cocoa extract is manufactured using the same process as for their cocoa powder 
and therefore quality control including the management of  undesirable substance 

 
3 August 2015 - Food Safety Authority of Ireland 
 
levels are equivalent. However, the applicant has provided analytical data providing 
reassurance on the level of potential contaminants including heavy metals, PAHs, 
mycotoxins, pesticides and microorganisms. The additional extraction step required to 
produce cocoa extract utilises acetone, an authorised solvent for extraction purposes 
with residual levels in the final cocoa extract shown to be at acceptable levels. 
Conclusions 
Having reviewed the information provided by the applicant  in the original application 
dossier and subsequent clarifications , the FSAI is satisfied that under the proposed 
uses and use levels, cocoa extract (Coc oa Via®) produced by Mars Symbioscience is 
substantially equiv alent to Mars ’ natural cocoa powder in terms of composition, 
nutritional value, metabolism, intended use and level of undesirable substances. 
 