Natural Health Products Management of Applications Policy: Pre-submission process
Overview
Pre-submission process
Preparing and submitting your application
Application screening and assessment
Post-licensing processes
Appendices, Glossary, Acronyms
On this page
Determining whether a product is a natural health product
Application types
Application classes
Before submitting a product licence application
Master File
Modifying the Natural Health Products Ingredients Database
New company registration
Determining whether a product is a natural health product
As the applicant, you must confirm that your product meets the definition of an NHP as outlined in
section 1(1)
of the NHPR
before
you submit a product licence application (PLA).
To be classified as an NHP, a product must meet both the
substance
and
function
criteria.
Substance criteria
The product must contain, or be considered as, one or more of the following:
medicinal ingredients (MIs) listed in
Schedule 1
to the NHPR
a homeopathic medicine
a traditional medicine
Function criteria
The product must be represented for use in one or more of the following ways:
diagnosing, treating, mitigating, or preventing a disease, disorder or abnormal physical state or its symptoms in humans
restoring or correcting organic functions in humans
modifying organic functions in humans
Understanding what is meant by "representation"
Health Canada interprets "representation" (explicit or implied) to include:
indications of use or health claims
any wording, image, symbol, or implication on product labels
package inserts or advertisements (including websites)
placement and location of sale
Product format
Product format can be a factor in the determination of whether a product is an NHP.
Example:
conventional food formats such as prepackaged, ready-to-consume beverage products, bars, cereals, etc., versus dosage formats such as tablets or capsules
It is your responsibility, as the applicant, to determine the appropriate regulatory framework for your product.
Refer to
Appendix I
for resources to help determine whether your product falls under the NHPR.
If your product meets the definition of an NHP, you must obtain a product licence, that is Natural Product Number (NPN) or Homeopathic Medicine Number (DIN-HM) before it can legally be sold in Canada.
Proceeding with a product licence application
After reviewing all relevant resources, you may submit a PLA to NNHPD if you believe your product is an NHP and it meets the eligibility criteria.
NNHPD:
does not issue classification decisions before receiving a submission
makes regulatory classification decisions during the formal submission process
will only respond to pre-submission inquiries that seek clarification on its guidance documents
Application types
NNHPD categorizes NHP licence applications by application type:
traditional
general (non-traditional)
homeopathic (non-compendial)
compendial
Refer to the
glossary
for definitions of each application type.
Application classes
NNHPD groups applications into 3 classes based on how NNHPD monographs are used.
An NNHPD monograph is a written summary describing specific elements of an ingredient or a combination of ingredients.
NNHPD has developed a
Compendium of Monographs
, which you can use to support the safety, efficacy, and/or quality of an NHP as part of your PLA.
Class I applications
Class I (compendial) applications must fully comply with all parameters outlined in an individual NNHPD monograph. The application must match the monograph exactly, without any modifications. You may reference only one NNHPD monograph per Class I application.
Monograph requirements
Single-ingredient monographs
: The application must match all parameters of the monograph exactly
Multi-ingredient monographs
: Each ingredient must meet the safety and quality parameters of the monograph. At least one ingredient must also meet the efficacy parameters, unless otherwise specified in the monograph.
Class II applications
Class II applications may include general (non-traditional) or traditional, and fall into the following categories:
Applications supported entirely by 2 or more NNHPD monographs, with no deviations, except in specific cases:
there is no increased risk (for example: additive effects, over-medication, altered bioavailability and/or pharmacological activity) that cannot be mitigated by changes to the recommended conditions of use within the parameters of the monographs (for example: dosage, risk information, duration of use).
there is no reduction in efficacy (for example: conflicting therapeutic effects).
there are no incompatible recommended conditions of use (for example: contradictory claims, durations, and/or risk information).
Applications supported entirely by an
individual
or by an acceptable
combination
of NNHPD monographs with minor deviations to one or more monograph statements, provided the changes maintain the original intent of the monograph (for example: using "statements to the effect of")
Applications supported entirely by a combination of NNHPD monographs that include fruits and vegetables listed in the
Canadian Nutrient File
(CNF), prepared in a manner suitable for human consumption. These must:
exclude source materials listed as "refuse", that is, inedible parts
include a daily dose of up to 10 g of crude material or its crude equivalent for non-standardized extracts.
ensure the ingredient quantity aligns with typical consumption levels as per the CNF Database.
Homeopathic product applications with specific claims are not accepted under Class II.
Refer to the
Monograph combination guide
for more details.
Class III applications
Class III applications may include:
general (non-traditional)
traditional
homeopathic (non-compendial)
Class III applications fall outside the scope of Class I and II and require a full assessment of the product's safety, efficacy, and/or quality.
Class III applications include, but are not limited to, the following scenarios:
applications for products with an ingredient, claim, or condition of use not supported by an NNHPD monograph
applications for products with modified formulations (for example: liposomal, phytosomal, etc.) intended to improve the bioavailability and/or absorption of its medicinal ingredients
applications referencing a
Master File
or previously submitted evidence to support safety and/or efficacy
applications that partially reference monograph information but exceed the parameters outlined in the monograph (for example: dosage forms or routes of administration not specified in the monograph)
applications for homeopathic products with specific claims. Refer to the
Evidence for Homeopathic Medicines Guidance
applications supported entirely by NNHPD monographs but involving ingredient combinations that may require additional safety and/or efficacy assessment. These include combinations with lower certainty or increased risk, such as:
stimulant laxatives combined with diuretics
weight management ingredients/claims combined with diuretics
products with combined hormonal effects
Refer to the
Monograph combination guide
for further guidance.
Position on "statements to the effect of"
The use of "statements to the effect of" is not permitted in Class I applications. However, such statements remain acceptable in Class II and III applications. Any application that includes statements deviating from the exact wording provided in monographs must be submitted as a Class II or III application.
Before submitting a product licence application
This section outlines key information and instructions that must be reviewed and followed before submitting a PLA to NNHPD.
Failure to follow one or more of these requirements may jeopardize the application and could result in its refusal.
Refer to
Appendix II
for key guidance and supporting documents.
Pre-submission meeting
A pre-submission meeting gives you an opportunity to discuss the evidence required to support a Class III application. These meetings aim to:
help NNHPD staff become familiar with the proposed application before it is submitted, and provide a forum to discuss supporting evidence to facilitate the review process
establish which studies or scientific data you intend to use to support the safety and/or efficacy of the NHP, and assess the adequacy and appropriateness of proposed controls
allow you to discuss application details with NNHPD and receive feedback on potential concerns based on current regulatory requirements and experience
help NNHPD manage resources and expertise in accordance with the anticipated application workload
Pre-submission meetings do
not
involve a full assessment of the evidence and do
not
result in a regulatory decision. NNHPD's pre-submission feedback is informal and non-binding.
A pre-submission meeting is recommended for NHPs for which there is uncertainty (for example: limited or no history of authorizations under the given conditions of use), such as:
MIs not previously licensed
unfamiliar or unlicensed combinations of MIs
recommended conditions of use that have not yet been assessed or licensed
a dosage form that has not been assessed or has not been licensed for a particular MI
Meeting minutes for pre-submission meetings
You are responsible for taking minutes during a pre-submission meeting. You are expected to submit these minutes to NNHPD within 14 calendar days of the meeting for review and confirmation.
The meeting minutes do not constitute a regulatory decision, nor do they guarantee a favourable outcome. A regulatory decision can only be made upon receipt and assessment of a complete application.
How to request a pre-submission meeting
To request a pre-submission meeting, contact the NNHPD Client Support Unit at
nnhpd-dpsnso@hc-sc.gc.ca
.
You must submit your request at least 30 calendar days before the proposed meeting date. The request should include the following information:
purpose of the meeting
brief description of the product (for example: indicate if it is a combination product such as an NHP with a medical device)
specific questions you wish to discuss
international status of the product (for example: whether it has been authorized in another jurisdiction)
3 proposed meeting dates
Meeting prioritization and format
NNHPD prioritizes meeting requests that:
impact the filing of an application (see
eligibility criteria for product licence applications
)
relate to an existing licence
If NNHPD determines that your questions can be addressed more efficiently in writing, a written response will be sent to you, along with the rationale. If the response does not sufficiently address your concerns, you may request a meeting.
NNHPD will make every effort to schedule the meeting on one of the proposed dates, depending on the availability of subject matter experts. However, due to file complexity or competing priorities, alternative dates may be proposed.
All pre-submission meetings are held virtually via video or phone conference. Meetings are not recorded.
Pre-submission meeting information package
You must submit a pre-submission meeting information package to NNHPD at least 14 calendar days before the scheduled meeting date. The package must include the following:
cover letter
agenda for the meeting
list of participants, including their titles and roles
list of specific issues or questions you wish to discuss
summary of the product being presented
detailed list of:
MIs and their quantities
non-medicinal ingredients (NMIs), including their purposes and quantities
recommended conditions of use, including the health claim(s) for which authorization is sought
overview of the product's market history, including its regulatory status in foreign jurisdictions (if applicable)
summary of safety and efficacy data supporting the NHP
Failure to submit the information package on time will result in the meeting being rescheduled.
Master File
The manufacturer of an ingredient or raw material, known as the NHP Master File (NHP-MF) holder, may submit proprietary information directly to NNHPD without sharing it with the product licence applicant.
The NHP-MF holder (Senior Official) may issue a
letter of access
that allows one or more applicants to cross-reference the confidential file.
The NHP-MF is a confidential document and may only be accessed by Health Canada officials.
Submitting a Master File
The NHP-MF holder may submit unpublished evidence (for example: proprietary data not publicly available) to NNHPD to support product assessment.
Required information for NHP-MF submission:
ingredient or product name
company name and address
Senior Official's information
contact person's information
Designated Party Authorization
Note:
An NHP-MF is not an application for a product licence. It is supporting evidence for a PLA
Only one electronic copy of the NHP-MF should be submitted
NNHPD does not accept paper copies of NHP-MFs
Do not submit a PLA form with an NHP-MF
Secure submission
NNHPD recommends submitting NHP-MFs via Connect (formerly known as ePost Connect), due to security limitations with regular email.
Refer to the section on
submitting an application
for details on using Connect.
Processing a Master File
Upon receipt of an NHP-MF, NNHPD will:
assign an MF number
send an acknowledgment letter to the NHP-MF holder
Although there is no service standard for processing NHP-MFs, NNHPD aims to assign an MF number within 30 calendar days of receipt.
Note:
NNHPD only assesses an NHP-MF when it is referenced in a PLA
NNHPD only reviews the information relevant to the PLA
During the product assessment process, the NHP-MF holder may receive an
Information Request Notice
(IRN) if clarification or additional information is needed.
NNHPD communicates the final regulatory decision on a PLA (that is, whether it issues a product licence or refuses the application) only to the PLA applicant.
Referencing a Master File
To protect the proprietary nature of the files and to confirm access, you, as the applicant, must include a letter of access from the NHP-MF holder as part of your PLA to reference information contained in an NHP-MF.
This letter must:
be on the official company letterhead of the NHP-MF holder
be dated and signed by the Senior Official of the NHP-MF holder company
grant reference directly to the applicant (not to a manufacturer or consultant)
must be no older than 3 years
include:
name and address of the company being granted access
name of the product referencing the NHP-MF
assigned MF number
Example:
Company A authorizes Company B to reference MF number: XXXXX MFXXX (NHP-MF Name)
Option to provide a general authorization
The NHP-MF holder may also authorize a company to reference some or all of their NHP-MFs. In these cases, a single general letter of access may be used, and individual letters for each application are not required.
Consequences of a missing authorization
If you do not provide a valid letter of access, NNHPD cannot assess the NHP-MF in conjunction with the PLA that references it. This may lead to the refusal of the application referencing the NHP-MF due to insufficient information to support the product's safety, efficacy and/or quality.
Modifying the Natural Health Products Ingredients Database
You must confirm that all proposed ingredients and sub-ingredients, including each ingredient's purpose, if applicable, are listed in the
Natural Health Products Ingredients Database
(NHPID) with the correct conditions of use before submitting a PLA.
Note:
If an ingredient or its purpose is not listed in the NHPID, the PLA form cannot be completed, and the application will be refused, if submitted incomplete.
Notes in the application or cover letter about missing ingredients and sub-ingredients are not accepted.
If you wish to include an ingredient, sub-ingredient, or ingredient purpose that is not listed in the NHPID, you must submit a formal modification request.
Refer to
Appendix II
for more information on the NHPID.
Evidence requirements
Requests to modify the NHPID must be supported by credible, verifiable, and objective information aligned with applicable regulations, definitions, guidance, and policies.
Acceptable sources include:
pharmacopoeias
peer-reviewed journal articles
books by reputable, established authors
foreign government or regulatory authority documents, evaluations, and websites
Submission process
To request a modification to the NHPID, you must:
Complete the
NHPID Request Form
Provide sufficient supporting evidence for:
MI identity and function
NMI purpose
any other requested modification
Typographic corrections do not require supporting evidence.
You are responsible for ensuring that all necessary evidence is provided, which may go beyond what's expected in the form.
Additional information
NNHPD may request further details to ensure ingredients are appropriately displayed in the NHPID and aligned with the
Natural Health Products Online System Standard Terminology Guide
.
This helps improve submission quality and ensures consistency in:
PLA forms
amendment and notification forms (ANFs)
product labels (in accordance with the NHPR)
You are encouraged to prioritize requests associated with products intended for sale or manufacture in Canada within 12 months of licensing.
Processing timeline
Requests are generally processed in the order received, but may be prioritized based on:
complexity
volume of requests
urgency related to an upcoming submission
All modifications must be completed before submitting a new application or an amendment.
Updates
Changes made to the NHPID are listed in the "
What's New in the NHPID
" section after each update cycle.
The NHPID is updated monthly, typically on the last Friday of each month.
NNHPD will only contact requesters if clarification is needed or if the submitted information is insufficient.
NNHPD does not notify applicants individually when an ingredient has been added to the NHPID.
New Company Registration
A
new applicant
must register their company with NNHPD before submitting their first PLA. This step is essential to:
enabling access to the web-based PLA form
ensuring traceability of applications
NNHPD will issue a unique 5-digit company code upon registration. You must include this code in all future applications to ensure proper processing.
How to register
You must complete the
New Company Registration Form
to register a company and obtain a company code.
Note:
This requirement applies only to new companies
Companies that have previously submitted a PLA have already been issued a company code and do
not
need to register again
Locating an existing company code
If you already have a company code, you can find it on NNHPD correspondence documents, such as:
issuance letters
IRNs
notices of refusal
Page details
2025-12-17