Four Sigmatic Focus Organic Mushroom Coffee | Instant Mushroom Coffee Mix with Lion's Mane, Chaga and Rhodiola for Better Focus and Immune Support | 10 Packets | Grocery Pickup & Delivery | Whole Foods Market
Grocery Pickup & Delivery
Weekly Sales
Catering
Recipes
Shop Aisles
Deals
Side sheet
Grocery Pickup & Delivery
Previous
Next
Four Sigmatic
Four Sigmatic Focus Organic Mushroom Coffee | Instant Mushroom Coffee Mix with Lion's Mane, Chaga and Rhodiola for Better Focus and Immune Support | 10 Packets
Select
Flavor
:
Focus (10 Packets)
Calm (10 Packets)
Focus (10 Packets)
Protect (10 Packets)
Protein (10 Servings)
Classic Roast (30 Servings)
Focus (30 Servings)
Focus Instant Coffee (30 Serving Bag)
High Dose Focus (30 Servings)
Add to Cart
Description
AN INNOVATION IN INSTANT COFFEE — After carefully roasting and brewing the shade grown, organic coffee beans, we concentrate our adaptogen coffee by evaporation, and finish it off by spray-drying it into a pure, delectable, instant coffee powder. We take organic mushroom coffee very seriously, which is why we also third party lab test each batch for the utmost quality, ensuring each serving will deliver 50mg of caffeine (about half of a regular cup of organic coffee).
WHY WOULD WE EVER CREATE INSTANT MUSHROOM COFFEE — We love organic instant coffee, but it has its downsides. We took 250mg of organic Lion's Mane powder (per serving), a functional, nootropic mushroom, which has been used around the world for centuries for increased focus and creativity, and combined it with our delectable, fair trade, organic coffee powder. This unparalleled pairing means no jitters, and hours of crash-free FOCUS.
RISE AND REALLY, TRULY SHINE — Each cup of instant mushroom coffee contains 250mg of wild-harvested, organic Chaga. Known as The King of Mushrooms, Chaga got its title from its incredible immune-supporting effects. Chaga is absolutely loaded with antioxidants. In fact, it is one of the most antioxidant-dense foods on the entire planet.
THE VIGOR OF THE VIKING ROOT — Our organic instant mushroom coffee powder in particular is infused with Rhodiola Rosea – an ancient adaptogen traditionally used to support endurance, reduce stressors, and boost brain function. We source this resilient organic Rhodiola Rosea extract wild grown from one of the world’s harshest environments, the mountains of Tibet.
SCIENTIFICALLY SPEAKING, THIS MUSHROOM COFFEE IS PRETTY MUCH MAGIC — Functional mushrooms have been used for centuries to improve productivity, immune support, and more. Unfortunately, most organic mushroom coffees on the market don't use mushrooms at all, instead using mycelium. At Four Sigmatic, we bring the best of nature to every day, so we always use the mushrooms' fruiting bodies in our organic instant mushroom coffee which contains 15x more active ingredients than the mycelium.
Dietary Type
Vegan
Vegan
Vegan
Close panel
Vegan foods are those without animal products, including meat, poultry, seafood, dairy, eggs and honey.
View products
While we work to ensure that product information is correct, on occasion manufacturers may alter their ingredient lists. Actual product packaging and materials may contain more and/or different information than that shown on our Web site. We recommend that you do not solely rely on the information presented and that you always read labels, warnings, and directions before using or consuming a product. For additional information about a product, please contact the manufacturer. Content on this site is for reference purposes and is not intended to substitute for advice given by a physician, pharmacist, or other licensed health-care professional. You should not use this information as self-diagnosis or for treating a health problem or disease. Contact your health-care provider immediately if you suspect that you have a medical problem. Information and statements regarding dietary supplements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration and are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease or health condition. Amazon.com assumes no liability for inaccuracies or misstatements about products.
Close
Close
Close
Log in with your Amazon account to see shipping options.
Delivery options and delivery speeds may vary for different locations
Log in with Amazon
Close
An item was added to your cart, but there was an error loading the product details.