Application for consultation to determine the status of a novel food 
pursuant to Article 4(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on novel foods.  
 
Recipient Member State 
Finnish Food Authority 
Name and description of the food in question 
Extract powder from the fruiting body of Lion’s mane (Hericium erinaceus) 
The extract powder is produced from the fruiting body of the mushroom Lion’s mane (Hericium erinaceus) 
with a method that utilizes both ultrasonic-assisted extraction (UAE) and traditional hot water extraction. 
Fruiting bodies are dried and ground, extracted with hot water and UAE treated, freeze-dried, and 
packed. The Lion’s mane extract powder is used as an ingredient in foods and food supplements.  
Status 
Not novel. 
Food category 
Not relevant. 
Reasons statement 
The competent authorities of the EU Member States and the European Commission were consulted.  
According to the Novel Food Status Catalogue of the European Commission, the fruiting body of Lion’s 
mane (Hericium erinaceus) mushroom has been used for human consumption to a significant degree within 
the Union before 15 May 1997 and is thus not novel. On a general basis, according to common agreement 
with the Member states, the same status applies to non-concentrated water extracts of non-novel foods. 
The difference in this food in question is that the water extraction has been assisted with ultrasound. 
The Ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) is not a new production process, as it has been used within the 
Union in food production for liquid foodstuff and especially for different plant-based products prior to 15 
May 1997. However, according to the information provided in the request, the UAE combined with water 
extraction has not been previously used for mushrooms in the EU. The question is then, whether this 
production process, which is novel for mushrooms, gives rise to significant changes in the composition or 
structure of a food, affecting its nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances. According 
to the evidence provided in the request, the UAE method combined with traditional water extraction does 
not lead to significant changes in the composition or structure of Lion’s mane extract, affecting its’ 
nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances when compared to the traditional water 
extraction method. 
Conclusion 
Extract powder from the fruiting body of Lion’s mane (Hericium erinaceus) is not novel. 
 
Ref. Ares(2025)1618080 - 28/02/2025
