H&F Amid Pectin - Herbstreith & Fox Skip to content Herbstreith & Fox Die Pektin Spezialisten Mobile Menu Pectins Interesting facts on pectin H&F Classic Pectin H&F Amid Pectin H&F Instant Pectin H&F Combi Pectin Applications Jams and fruit spreads Bakery goods Confectionery Dairy products Plant-based dairy alternatives Fruit preparations Beverages Gelling agents Fine food products and delicatessen sauces Additional applications About Us Corporate responsibility Research and development Quality management OH&S policy Energy management Company history Culture and engagement Service Information material Technical application information Application overviews Certificates Career News Contact Production sites Newsletter Log In Log In Forgotten your password? Reset password Forgotten Password Cancel Log In Search De Pl Search H&F Amid Pectin Technological supplement and alternative The group of H&F Amid pectins complement the range of Classic pectins technologically and expand the application area of pectins. H&F Amid pectins are produced by suspending the dried pectin in alcohol and treating it with ammonia. This process modifies a defined number of methyl ester groups into amide groups (amidation). The special properties of the H&F Amid pectins result in different gel textures, offer technological benefits in certain areas and make additional functionalities utilisable. Functionalities Continuous gels Pseudoplastic textures with yield point Thermoreversible gels Industrial fruit preparations (e.g. for dairy products and bakery products) Texture and syneresis reduction in dairy products Applications Fruit spreads, jams, marmalades and jellies Household gelling agents Confectionery gum and jelly products Acidified milk products (e.g. yoghurt) and vegan alternatives Fruit sauces and toppings Delicatessen products Other pectins H&F Classic Pectin Universal diversity and standardization H&F Instant Pectin Technologically optimized pectins H&F Combi Pectin Pectins for very specific applications Advice on pectins and their applications Do you have any questions or would you like to make use of our personal consulting service? We would be happy to give you advice and inform you in detail – just send us a message! Contact Click To Callback Career portal H&F Group LinkedIn Xing Instagram Facebook Data Privacy Statement Legal Notice General Terms & Conditions Newsletter © 2026 Herbstreith & Fox GmbH & Co. KG