Structure formation in sugar containing pectin gels - Influence of gel composition and cooling rate on the gelation of non-amidated and amidated low-methoxylated pectin <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.1a956cd667daeef2.css"> Skip to main content Log In Log in New user? Click here to register. Have you forgotten your password? Communities & Collections All of DepositOnce Home DepositOnce Technische Universität Berlin Publications Structure formation in sugar containing pectin gels - Influence of gel composition and cooling rate on the gelation of non-amidated and amidated low-methoxylated pectin Loading… 2017-06-21 🆕 Date Issued: 2017-06-21 🗄 In DepositOnce: 2020-03-02 Article Accepted Version doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-9769 Please use this identifier to cite or link to this item: DOI link DOI identifier Structure formation in sugar containing pectin gels - Influence of gel composition and cooling rate on the gelation of non-amidated and amidated low-methoxylated pectin Kastner, Hanna ; Einhorn-Stoll, Ulrike ; Drusch, Stephan Inst. Lebensmitteltechnologie und Lebensmittelchemie Fak. 3 Prozesswissenschaften Inst. Lebensmitteltechnologie und Lebensmittelchemie Gel structure formation and gel properties of low-methoxyl pectin (LMP) and low-methoxyl amidated pectin (LMAP) with similar degree of methoxylation have been investigated by oscillatory rheological measurements. The gelling process was examined in a sugar-acid environment matching the conditions in jams and jellies. Factors studied included cooling rate, calcium content and pH. Parameters derived from the rheological measurements comprised the gel point, structuring velocity, initial and critical structuring temperature, average structuring developing rate and loss factor (tanδend).
The influence of the cooling rate on the gelling process of LMP was moderate and the influence on the final gel properties was significant, tanδend decreased with increasing cooling rate. The calcium content significantly affected the structuring process of LMAP and the final gel properties. At high calcium content, the gelling process started at a higher temperature but the resulting gels were less strong. The pH had a significant but partly opposite effect on the gelation of LMP as well as LMAP. The differences in gelation behavior between LMP and LMAP can be explained by the lower number of available blocks of free carboxyl groups in LMAP as well as by the formation of additional hydrogen bonds through the amide groups. Show more pectin gelling process rheology cooling rate calcium pH Files kastner_etal_2017.pdf (916.54 KB) Accepted manuscript Is Part Of 10.14279/depositonce-8615 Published in: Food Hydrocolloids , 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2017.06.023 , Elsevier Full item page Learn more Help DepositOnce Policy TU Open Access Policy TU Research Data Policy Contact us We cooperate with DataCite Base Search Engine OpenAIRE Deutsche Nationalbibliothek re3data Legal Imprint Privacy Policy