PART 169—FOOD DRESSINGS AND FLAVORINGS
Subpart A—General Provisions
§ 169.3 Definitions.
For the purposes of this part:
(a) The term vanilla beans means the properly cured and dried fruit pods of Vanilla planifolia Andrews and of Vanilla tahitensis Moore.
(b) The term unit weight of vanilla beans means, in the case of vanilla beans containing not more than 25 percent moisture, 13.35 ounces of such beans; and, in the case of vanilla beans containing more than 25 percent moisture, it means the weight of such beans equivalent in content of moisture-free vanilla-bean solids to 13.35 ounces of vanilla beans containing 25 percent moisture. (For example, one unit weight of vanilla beans containing 33.25 percent moisture amounts to 15 ounces.) The moisture content of vanilla beans is determined by the method prescribed in “Official Methods of Analysis of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists,” 13th Ed. (1980), sections 7.004 and 7.005, which is incorporated by reference, except that the toluene used is blended with 20 percent by volume of benzene and the total distillation time is 4 hours. Copies of the material incorporated by reference may be obtained from the AOAC INTERNATIONAL, 481 North Frederick Ave., suite 500, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, or may be examined at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html. To prepare samples for analysis, the pods are chopped into pieces approximately
1/4-inch in longest dimension, using care to avoid moisture change.
(c) The term unit of vanilla constituent means the total sapid and odorous principles extractable from one unit weight of vanilla beans, as defined in paragraph (b) of this section, by an aqueous alcohol solution in which the content of ethyl alcohol by volume amounts to not less than 35 percent.
Subpart B—Requirements for Specific Standardized Food Dressings and Flavorings
§ 169.140 Mayonnaise.
(a) Description. Mayonnaise is the emulsified semisolid food prepared from vegetable oil(s), one or both of the acidifying ingredients specified in paragraph (b) of this section, and one or more of the egg yolk-containing ingredients specified in paragraph (c) of this section. One or more of the ingredients specified in paragraph (d) of this section may also be used. The vegetable oil(s) used may contain an optional crystallization inhibitor as specified in paragraph (d)(7) of this section. All the ingredients from which the food is fabricated shall be safe and suitable. Mayonnaise contains not less than 65 percent by weight of vegetable oil. Mayonnaise may be mixed and packed in an atmosphere in which air is replaced in whole or in part by carbon dioxide or nitrogen.
(b) Acidifying ingredients. (1) Any vinegar or any vinegar diluted with water to an acidity, calculated as acetic acid, of not less than 2
1/2 percent by weight, or any such vinegar or diluted vinegar mixed with an optional acidifying ingredient as specified in paragraph (d)(6) of this section. For the purpose of this paragraph, any blend of two or more vinegars is considered to be a vinegar.
(2) Lemon juice and/or lime juice in any appropriate form, which may be diluted with water to an acidity, calculated as citric acid, of not less than 2
1/2 percent by weight.
(c) Egg yolk-containing ingredients. Liquid egg yolks, frozen egg yolks, dried egg yolks, liquid whole eggs, frozen whole eggs, dried whole eggs, or any one or more of the foregoing ingredients listed in this paragraph with liquid egg white or frozen egg white.
(d) Other optional ingredients. The following optional ingredients may also be used:
(1) Salt.
(2) Nutritive carbohydrate sweeteners.
(3) Any spice (except saffron or turmeric) or natural flavoring, provided it does not impart to the mayonnaise a color simulating the color imparted by egg yolk.
(4) Monosodium glutamate.
(5) Sequestrant(s), including but not limited to calcium disodium EDTA (calcium disodium ethylenediamine- tetraacetate) and/or disodium EDTA (disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate), may be used to preserve color and/or flavor.
(6) Citric and/or malic acid in an amount not greater than 25 percent of the weight of the acids of the vinegar or diluted vinegar, calculated as acetic acid.
(7) Crystallization inhibitors, including but not limited to oxystearin, lecithin, or polyglycerol esters of fatty acids.
(e) Nomenclature. The name of the food is “Mayonnaise”.
(f) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter.
§ 169.150 Salad dressing.
(a) Description. Salad dressing is the emulsified semisolid food prepared from vegetable oil(s), one or both of the acidifying ingredients specified in paragraph (b) of this section, one or more of the egg yolk-containing ingredients specified in paragraph (c) of this section, and a starchy paste prepared as specified in paragraph (e) of this section. One or more of the ingredients in paragraph (e) of this section may also be used. The vegetable oil(s) used may contain an optional crystallization inhibitor as specified in paragraph (e)(8) of this section. All the ingredients from which the food is fabricated shall be safe and suitable. Salad dressing contains not less than 30 percent by weight of vegetable oil and not less egg yolk-containing ingredient than is equivalent in egg yolk solids content to 4 percent by weight of liquid egg yolks. Salad dressing may be mixed and packed in an atmosphere in which air is replaced in whole or in part by carbon dioxide or nitrogen.
(b) Acidifying ingredients. (1) Any vinegar or any vinegar diluted with water, or any such vinegar or diluted vinegar mixed with an optional acidifying ingredient as specified in paragraph (e)(6) of this section. For the purpose of this paragraph, any blend of two or more vinegars is considered to be a vinegar.
(2) Lemon juice and/or lime juice in any appropriate form, which may be diluted with water.
(c) Egg yolk-containing ingredients. Liquid egg yolks, frozen egg yolks, dried egg yolks, liquid whole eggs, frozen whole eggs, dried whole eggs, or any one of more of the foregoing ingredients listed in this paragraph with liquid egg white or frozen egg white.
(d) Starchy paste. It may be prepared from a food starch, food starch-modified, tapioca flour, wheat flour, rye flour, or any two or more of these. Water may be added in the preparation of the paste.
(e) Other optional ingredients. The following optional ingredients may also be used:
(1) Salt.
(2) Nutritive carbohydrate sweeteners.
(3) Any spice (except saffron or turmeric) or natural flavoring, provided it does not impart to the salad dressing a color simulating the color imparted by egg yolk.
(4) Monosodium glutamate.
(5) Stabilizers and thickeners. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate may be added in accordance with § 172.810 of this chapter.
(6) Citric and/or malic acid may be used in an amount not greater than 25 percent of the weight of the acids of the vinegar or diluted vinegar calculated as acetic acid.
(7) Sequestrant(s), including but not limited to calcium disodium EDTA (calcium disodium ethylenediamine-tetraacetate) and/or disodium EDTA (disodium ethylenediamine-tetraactetate), may be used to preserve color and/or flavor.
(8) Crystallization inhibitors, including but not limited to oxystearin, lecithin, or polyglycerol esters of fatty acids.
(f) Nomenclature. The name of the food is “Salad dressing”.
(g) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter.
§ 169.175 Vanilla extract.
(a) Vanilla extract is the solution in aqueous ethyl alcohol of the sapid and odorous principles extractable from vanilla beans. In vanilla extract the content of ethyl alcohol is not less than 35 percent by volume and the content of vanilla constituent, as defined in § 169.3(c), is not less than one unit per gallon. The vanilla constituent may be extracted directly from vanilla beans or it may be added in the form of concentrated vanilla extract or concentrated vanilla flavoring or vanilla flavoring concentrated to the semisolid form called vanilla oleo-resin. Vanilla extract may contain one or more of the following optional ingredients:
(1) Glycerin.
(2) Propylene glycol.
(3) Sugar (including invert sugar).
(4) Dextrose.
(5) Corn sirup (including dried corn sirup).
(b)(1) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla extract” or “Extract of vanilla”.
(2) When the vanilla extract is made in whole or in part by dilution of vanilla oleoresin, concentrated vanilla extract, or concentrated vanilla flavoring, the label shall bear the statement “Made from ______” or “Made in part from ______”, the blank being filled in with the name or names “vanilla oleoresin”, “concentrated vanilla extract”, or “concentrated vanilla flavoring”, as appropriate. If the article contains two or more units of vanilla constituent, the name of the food shall include the designation “__-fold”, the blank being filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the number of units of vanilla constituent per gallon of the article.
(3) Wherever the name of the food appears on the label so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the labeling required by paragraph (b)(2) of this section shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such name, without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter.
(c) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter.
§ 169.176 Concentrated vanilla extract.
(a) Concentrated vanilla extract conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla extract by § 169.175, except that it is concentrated to remove part of the solvent, and each gallon contains two or more units of vanilla constituent as defined in § 169.3(c). The content of ethyl alcohol is not less than 35 percent by volume.
(b) The specified name of the food is “Concentrated vanilla extract __-fold” or “__-fold concentrated vanilla extract”, the blank being filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the number of units of vanilla constituent per gallon of the article. (For example, “Concentrated vanilla extract 2-fold”.)
§ 169.177 Vanilla flavoring.
(a) Vanilla flavoring conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla extract by § 169.175, except that its content of ethyl alcohol is less than 35 percent by volume.
(b) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla flavoring”.
§ 169.178 Concentrated vanilla flavoring.
(a) Concentrated vanilla flavoring conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla flavoring by § 169.177, except that it is concentrated to remove part of the solvent, and each gallon contains two or more units of vanilla constituent as defined in § 169.3(c).
(b) The specified name of the food is “Concentrated vanilla flavoring __-fold” or “__-fold concentrated vanilla flavoring”, the blank being filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the number of units of vanilla constituent per gallon of the article. (For example, “Concentrated vanilla flavoring 3-fold”.)
§ 169.179 Vanilla powder.
(a) Vanilla powder is a mixture of ground vanilla beans or vanilla oleoresin or both, with one or more of the following optional blending ingredients:
(1) Sugar.
(2) Dextrose.
(3) Lactose.
(4) Food starch (including food starch-modified as prescribed in § 172.892 of this chapter).
(5) Dried corn sirup.
(6) Gum acacia.
Vanilla powder may contain one or any mixture of two or more of the anticaking ingredients specified in paragraph (b) of this section, but the total weight of any such ingredient or mixture is not more than 2 percent of the weight of the finished vanilla powder. Vanilla powder contains in each 8 pounds not less than one unit of vanilla constituent, as defined in § 169.3(c).
(b) The anticaking ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are:
(1) Aluminum calcium silicate.
(2) Calcium silicate.
(3) Calcium stearate.
(4) Magnesium silicate.
(5) Tricalcium phosphate.
(c)(1) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla powder __-fold” or “__-fold vanilla powder”, except that if sugar is the optional blending ingredient used, the word “sugar” may replace the word “powder”. The blank in the name is filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the number of units of vanilla constituent per 8 pounds of the article. However, if the strength of the article is less than 2-fold, the term “__-fold” is omitted from the name.
(2) The label of vanilla powder shall bear the common names of any of the optional ingredients specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section that are used, except that where the alternative name “Vanilla sugar” is used for designating the food it is not required that sugar be named as an optional ingredient.
(3) Wherever the name of the food appears on the label so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the labeling required by paragraph (c)(2) of this section shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such name, without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter.
(d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter.
§ 169.180 Vanilla-vanillin extract.
(a) Vanilla-vanillin extract conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla extract by § 169.175, except that for each unit of vanilla constituent, as defined in § 169.3(c), contained therein, the article also contains not more than 1 ounce of added vanillin.
(b) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla-vanillin extract __-fold” or “__-fold vanilla-vanillin extract”, followed immediately by the statement “contains vanillin, an artificial flavor (or flavoring)”. The blank in the name is filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the sum of the number of units of vanilla constituent plus the number of ounces of added vanillin per gallon of the article. However, if the strength of the article is less than 2-fold, the term “__-fold” is omitted from the name.
§ 169.181 Vanilla-vanillin flavoring.
(a) Vanilla-vanillin flavoring conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla-vanillin extract by § 169.180, except that its content of ethyl alcohol is less than 35 percent by volume.
(b) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla-vanillin flavoring __-fold” or “__-fold vanilla-vanillin flavoring”, followed immediately by the statement “contains vanillin, an artificial flavor (or flavoring)”. The blank in the name is filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the sum of the number of units of vanilla constituent plus the number of ounces of added vanillin per gallon of the article. However, if the strength of the article is less than 2-fold, the term “__-fold” is omitted from the name.
§ 169.182 Vanilla-vanillin powder.
(a) Vanilla-vanillin powder conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to any requirement for label statement of ingredients prescribed for vanilla powder by § 169.179, except that for each unit of vanilla constituent as defined in § 169.3(c) contained therein, the article also contains not more than 1 ounce of added vanillin.
(b) The specified name of the food is “Vanilla-vanillin powder __-fold” or “__-fold vanilla-vanillin powder”, followed immediately by the statement “contains vanillin, an artificial flavor (or flavoring)”. If sugar is the optional blending ingredient used, the word “sugar” may replace the word “powder” in the name. The blank in the name is filled in with the whole number (disregarding fractions) expressing the sum of the number of units of vanilla constituent plus the number of ounces of added vanillin per 8 pounds of the article. However, if the strength of the article is less than 2-fold the term “__-fold” is omitted from the name.