Extra fine tigernut flour ▷ Gluten-free ▷ Organic and conventional Skip to content VALUES THE TIGERNUTS PRODUCTS Extra fine tigernuts flour Fine tigernuts flour Traditional tigernuts flour Defatted tigernuts flour Tigernuts Butt3r Peeled tigernuts Sliced tigernuts Diced tigernuts Tigernuts Tigernuts oil NEWS CONTACT ENG ESP DEU FRE VALUES THE TIGERNUTS PRODUCTS Extra fine tigernuts flour Fine tigernuts flour Traditional tigernuts flour Defatted tigernuts flour Tigernuts Butt3r Peeled tigernuts Sliced tigernuts Diced tigernuts Tigernuts Tigernuts oil NEWS CONTACT ENG ESP DEU FRE Extra fine tigernuts flour Extra fine tigernut flour Tigernuts’ extra fine tigernut flour is the result of years of experience and R&D efforts. From a selection of the best tigernuts, we have developed an innovative milling technique to obtain a flour whose fine grain opens the door to new applications in the food industry. Our extra fine flour is the superfood ingredient par excellence for professionals in the sector who are looking for a tasty, healthy and original substitute for ordinary flour. This exclusive and unique proposal in the market also represents an unprecedented work base for the development of new products. We promote our expertise to our customers, helping them optimise extra fine tigernut flour to meet their technical specifications. Our team is currently working on many variations (including a sterilised version) of this high-performance flour in collaboration with some of the most prestigious companies in the food industry. A versatile, tasty and original superfood ingredient for the development of new products. The features are optimised and adjusted to customer needs and market expectations. Tigernuts’ guarantee: quality and availability, always. raw ecological vegan gluten free kosher halal ORGANIC The ecological cultivation of our tigernuts Increasing the production of ORGANIC tigernuts is one of our main commitments. On the one hand, it is a natural response to growing consumer demand, expressed through our customers. On the other hand, the transition to ecological farming is motivated by an ambition: to work better, to propose a better product, to be a better company. Currently, our ORGANIC tigernut, certified by Control Union and regularly controlled, comes from Niger. It is free of toxic residues from pesticides, herbicides, insecticides and synthetic fertilisers used in conventional agriculture. Crop rotation is applied in our ORGANIC fields so as not to deplete the nutrients from the soil, improve biodiversity and maintain crop yields. Currently our production varies between 25% and 35% of ecological product. Our goal is to exceed 50% by 2025. + information about our ORGANIC tigernut DOWNLOAD CATALOGUE FERCHU: tigernut demonstrates its potential in dairy analogue development TIGERNUTS, in collaboration with Sigma Biotech, has successfully completed the FERCHU project – “Research into and application of tigernut derivatives for the development of fermented protein-based dairy analogues” – carried out within the framework of funding provided by CDTI – the Spanish Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology and Innovation. The project had a Read More » 5 tips for properly storing organic tiger nuts during the summer Heat also affects the quality of organic tiger nuts With the arrival of summer, high temperatures can become a challenge for the preservation of many natural ingredients. Organic tiger nuts and products derived from them, such as flours, creams or ingredients intended for the food industry, are no exception. Precisely because these are organic ingredients, Read More » Tigernuts Butt3r: New retail-ready formats coming soon A practical solution designed to support our partners’ growth Since its launch, Tigernuts Butt3r has been steadily gaining attention among both tiger nuts enthusiasts and food professionals looking for natural, clean-label and versatile ingredients. Its unique texture, nutritional profile and wide range of applications have generated very positive feedback across different markets and product categories. Read More » WE ARE TIGERNUTS. At Tigernuts we develop and export tigernut ingredients all over the world. Our business model is that of a family-run company: we stand by our original values. We are characterised by our capacity for innovation and adaptation, always in line with our ethical, social and environmental commitment. PRODUCTS. Extra fine tigernuts flour Fine tigernuts flour Traditional tigernuts flour Tigernuts Butt3r Peeled tigernuts Sliced tigernuts Diced tigernuts Tigernuts oil Tigernuts Extra fine tigernuts flour Fine tigernuts flour Traditional tigernuts flour Tigernuts Butt3r Peeled tigernuts Sliced tigernuts Diced tigernuts Tigernuts oil Tigernuts CONTACT. Our team is at your service to answer any query or question you may have. CONTACT info@tigernuts.com · +34 962 740 932 Find more information in our tigernuts blog . Legal Terms Cookies Privacy policy Legal Terms Cookies Privacy policy © 2000-2026 TIGERNUTS TRADERS, S.L. · P.O. BOX 169 - Av. La Pobla de Vallbona 39 - E46183 LA ELIANA (VALENCIA), SPAIN Home » PRODUCTS » Extra fine tigernuts flour Manage Cookie Consent We use proprietary as well as third party cookies in order to improve our services and to display ads related to your preferences by analysing your browsing habits. You can accept all cookies clicking on "Accept". You can change the settings or obtain more information at our cookie policy . Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Reject Configure OK Configure {title} {title} {title} Cookie settings Scroll to Top