Table S3. Sensory attributes list with definitions used for the sensory evaluation of PJs. 
 
Attributes 
Definitions  
Appearance 
Brick-red colour 
Colour which might change from the brick red colour to the more or less intense brown 
colour. 
Purple-red colour 
Colour which might change from red colour to more or less intense purple colour. 
Cloudy 
Opalescence; difficulty to see trough a transparent glass. 
Smell 
Pomegranate fruit 
Sour, sweet and fruity aromas. These aromas remind the assessor to a combination of 
grape, redberry, and other berries such as blackberries, cherries, currants, raspberries. 
Vegetable notes like beets and carrots might be also present. 
Fresh fruit 
General term for describing sweet, floral and fruity aromas, correlated to a just extracted 
fruit. 
Tomato 
Aroma associated to the tomato fruit. 
Berry 
Sweet, slightly sour aromas related to ripe berries, such as raspberries, blueberries, 
blackberries, currants. 
Cherry 
Sour, fruity and slightly bitter aromas commonly related to the cherries. 
Cooked apple 
Sweet slightly fruity and floral aroma, commonly related to a processed apple juice and 
cooked apples. 
Plum 
Sweet aromas, typical of dried plum. 
Floral 
Sweet and perfumed perception reminding to the flowers. 
Acetic acid 
Odour associated to the acetic acid. 
Vegetable-herbal 
Typical aroma of just cut grape vine and stem. 
Brown spices 
(star anise, clove) 
Sweet, refreshing and spicy aromas associated with star anise or clove. 
Wilted fruit 
Sweet honey or caramel-like aromas commonly associated with wilted fruits, such as raisins. 
Candies 
Sweet aroma often associated with processed essential oils and usually found in 
products such as gummy candies. 
Caramel 
Sweet aroma that may include notes of character identified as caramel and commonly 
associated with honey, brown sugar, caramel or other products that have undergone 
non-enzymatic browning and Maillard reaction. 
Honey 
Sweet, slightly spicy aroma associated with honey. 
Beet 
Earthy and slightly sweet aromas commonly associated with canned or cooked red beets. 
Mushroom/Earthy 
Aroma similar to moist soil, characteristic of cellars or similar. 
Metallic 
Flavour of a slightly oxidized metal, such as iron, copper and / or a silver teaspoon. 
Cooked 
Sweet aroma associated with that of caramel and honey. 
Texture/Mouthfeel 
Effervescence 
A feeling of an increased sensation on the tongue that may be due to intense carbonation 
or other causes. Evaluate during first 3–5 s after sample is placed in the mouth. 
Tamarind 
Aroma associated with tamarind, that is sour, very fruity and refreshing. 
Alcohol 
Intense fruity aroma similar to ethanol, aromatic associated with alcohol from fermented 
grape (red wine). 
Metallic 
A mouthfeel and aromatics associated “tin” cans, iron copper, or oxidized silver. 
Dryness 
A sensation of abrasion and drying of the surface of the teeth. 
Homogeneity 
Presence of fragments found in the mouth. 
Woody 
Aroma associated with chopped wood. 
Pungent 
A sharp, physically penetrating sensation in the nasal cavity. 
Astringency 
Dry puckering mouthfeel associate with tea leaves. 
Taste 
Sweet 
Taste associated with a sucrose solution. 
Sour 
Taste associated with an acetic acid solution.  
Bitter 
Taste associated with caffeine or quinine. 
 
