1. Introduction Centella asiatica  L. is a herbal plant from the Apiaceae family and Asiatica Linn. Species [ 1 , 2 ]. It is a perennial plant growing around water reservoirs throughout the majority of tropical and subtropical regions, such as India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Madagascar, South Africa, China, Korea, Japan, and Taiwan [ 3 , 4 ].  Centella asiatica  L. has been widely used in Ayurvedic medicine for thousands of years to treat skin diseases, such as acne, leprosy, lupus, ulcers, eczema, psoriasis, scleroderma, vitiligo, burns, wounds, and scars [ 2 , 5 ]. Moreover, it has a long history of internal use as a treatment for nervous system illnesses, such as sleep disorders, depression, and Alzheimer’s disease, due to its calming effect, improving memory and concentration [ 6 ]. The main bioactive compounds of  Centella asiatica  L. responsible for the therapeutic effects of the plant are pentacyclic triterpenoids, namely asiaticoside and madecassoside, and their aglycones, such as asiatic acid and madecassic acid [ 4 , 5 , 7 ]. The content of the triterpene saponin fraction varies from 1 wt.% to 8 wt.%, depending on the plant’s growth location [ 5 ]. Madecassoside (asiaticoside A) represents ursane-type triterpene glycoside and is the most abundant triterpenoid of this plant, with an asiaticoside as a second one. Other substances isolated from the aerial part of  Centella asiatica  L. include monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, tannins, phytosterols, flavonoids, essential oils, amino acids, and vitamins, such as vitamin C, vitamin B1, and vitamin B2 [ 4 , 5 ]. Pentacyclic triterpenoids offer a wide range of pharmacological properties related to the anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, antioxidant, antiviral, antibacterial, wound healing, neuroprotective, cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, anxiolytic, antifibrotic, anti-arthritic, anti-tumor, and anti-depressant activities [ 5 , 7 ]. Over the years, numerous studies have been conducted on the release of madecassoside and asiaticoside from intravenously or orally administered carriers, such as nanogels [ 8 ], alginate-chitosan nanoparticles [ 9 , 10 ], solid dispersion [ 11 , 12 ], capsules [ 13 ], and phospholipid-based naturosomes [ 14 ]. Centella asiatica  L. extracts containing asiaticoside and madecassoside, due to the ability to stimulate collagen synthesis in human fibroblasts and lipolytic, anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, antibacterial, and antioxidant activities, are widely used in dermatology and cosmetology for treatment of acne, burns, wounds, psoriasis, vitiligo, and as a preventive agent against stretch marks and skin aging [ 4 , 6 , 7 ]. Moreover,  Centella asiatica  L. has been used in skin care products for restoration of skin firmness and elasticity, as well as in body care products to reduce cellulite and stretch marks [ 5 , 15 ]. Due to its numerous applications in the treatment of skin diseases, the possibility of using a standardized  Centella asiatica  L. extract in dealing with atopic dermatitis has also been explored. Characteristic symptoms of atopic dermatitis are erythematous and papulovesicular eruptions, which frequently develop into oozing, crusting, and persistent and severe itching, resulting from dry skin [ 16 ]. Madecassoside and asiaticoside, present in the standardized ethanolic extract of  Centella asiatica  L. or isolated from this plant as pure chemical compounds, act as a responsive factor to the key inflammatory processes occurring in the skin with atopic dermatitis. The immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties of  Centella asiatica  L. extract and isolated triterpenoids were confirmed using in vitro and in vivo studies conducted by independent research groups [ 17 , 18 , 19 ]. 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB)-induced skin inflammation has been tested by Lee et al. by using in vitro and in vivo mouse models of atopic dermatitis skin [ 17 ]. In addition, the effect of the titrated extract of  Centella asiatica  L. (TECA) in a phthalic anhydride-induced atopic dermatitis animal model was studied by Park et al. [ 18 ]. Both groups confirmed that  Centella asiatica  L. extract inhibits hyperkeratosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells in atopic dermatitis lesions. These studies indicate that extracts of  Centella asiatica  L. or triterpene saponins isolated from this plant can be considered safe and effective therapeutic agents supporting atopic dermatitis treatment. Opposite to the glucocorticosteroids or calcineurin inhibitors commonly used during atopic dermatitis treatment, they do not show any side effects, such as skin atrophy or burning and stretch marks [ 19 ]. Therefore, studies on the release of triterpenoids from  Centella asiatica  L. from a variety of carriers applied to the skin have been recently conducted [ 20 ]. Among them, specific types of nanocarriers have been applied, namely nanoemulsions [ 21 ], solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) [ 22 ], nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC) [ 23 ], polymeric nanoparticles [ 24 ], and liposomes [ 25 ]. Also, film-forming polymeric solutions (FFPS) [ 26 , 27 ], bilayer microneedles [ 28 ], ultra-fine cellulose acetate fiber mats [ 29 ], and electrospun double-layered nanocomposite membranes [ 30 ] were tested as topical carriers for the  Centella asiatica  L. extracts. Due to the increasing consumers’ demands and obligations of the European Green Deal implementation, the recent trends in the cosmetic industry strongly move towards sustainability, which plays an important role in protecting ecosystems and biodiversity as it brings the possibility of obtaining environmentally friendly raw materials. This may be achieved by reducing carbon footprint and waste production, optimizing production processes, using green technologies, and applying ingredients obtained from agro-food wastes [ 31 ]. However, designing and marketing high-quality sustainable, eco-friendly, and biodegradable formulations stands as a big challenge to the cosmetic industry. There are several strategies for achieving sustainability in cosmetic products, with one based on replacing synthetic raw materials with those processed according to the green chemistry principles or COSMOS-approved natural ingredients [ 32 ]. Another strategy is based on lowering energy consumption during the acquisition of raw materials and production of cosmetics. This approach brings the reduction of the amount of greenhouse gases released, expressed as carbon dioxide equivalent units. As a result, studies regarding the development of sustainable cosmetic carriers using low-energy processes appear [ 33 , 34 ]. The study conducted by Tamburic et al. confirmed that using hot-cold emulsification, which is between the cold and hot manufacturing process of emulsions, saved approximately 82% (for O/W type emulsion) and 86% (for W/O type emulsion) of thermal energy in comparison to the hot process [ 33 ]. Moreover, Raposo et al. compared costs of the cold emulsification to the hot process and found that cold-processed O/W emulsions saved 67% in electrical, 36.7% in water, and 17.1% in the total production expenses [ 34 ]. The cold-processed emulsions allow not only to optimize production costs and minimize the carbon footprint but also enable the preservation of the valuable properties of natural ingredients, specifically oils used in the formulation, since oil-based ingredients under high temperature conditions are particularly susceptible to the oxidation process, resulting in the formation of free radicals [ 35 , 36 ]. The use of carriers based on oxidized oils can intensify inflammation on the skin, especially with atopic dermatitis [ 37 ]. Low-temperature emulsions processing, which supports the stability of lipid-based raw materials, becomes even more important when dealing with lipid-rich cosmetic formulations, so-called “emollient plus” products. The treatment of atopic dermatitis can also be supported by the dermal application of this type of product, as they minimize systemic effects and give good results in achieving remission of disease [ 38 , 39 ]. Conventional carriers such as W/O, O/W emulsions, and gels are the most commonly used types of formulations in the cosmetic industry. Therefore, studying the release of triterpenoids from  Centella asiatica  L. with high anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory potential will provide important information on the potential of the most optimal type of carriers. However, there is very limited research available on the release of anti-inflammatory triterpenoids, such as madecassoside and asiaticoside, from sustainable, environmentally friendly, and cold-processed conventional topical formulations, which can support the treatment of atopic dermatitis. For this reason, we have developed three types of topical carriers obtained by a cold process with low energy consumption and a noteworthy reduction in carbon footprint. A variety of emollient-rich carriers, namely O/W and W/O emulsions, were designed, taking into account the needs of the atopic skin, as they contained 31 wt.% and 21 wt.% of emollients for W/O and O/W emulsion types, respectively. Special emphasis was paid on replacing the conventional raw materials with their substitutes obtained in accordance with the green chemistry principles or derived from the agro-food industry waste. The high potential of their biodegradability and low toxicity to aquatic organisms was taken into account, as well. All of the raw materials used to prepare the formulations were COSMOS-approved and met the requirements of Ecocert standards. The obtained topical formulations were evaluated towards their suitability for madecassoside and asiaticoside controlled release, with a special emphasis on the possibility of applying to skin suffering from atopic dermatitis. An important aspect of our research was also to verify the effect of pH on the release profile of madecassoside and asiaticoside from the tested carriers, which will have a direct influence on the therapeutic effectiveness of the topical formulations used, as one of the elements of pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis is an imbalance in the pH of the skin acidic mantle, which has been recognized as a regulating factor of skin barrier permeability and homeostasis of stratum corneum [ 40 , 41 ]. To the best of our knowledge, there is very little data available on the parameter optimization (e.g., pH of the medium, concentration of the active substance) and kinetic study for the controlled release from cold-processed topical formulations serving as carriers for triterpenoids of  Centella asiatica  L. origin with a potentially therapeutic effect in the atopic skin.