2.1.2. Organoleptic Assessment and Physicochemical Properties of Topical Formulations The initial physicochemical parameters, such as pH, viscosity, and density, in the formulations prepared were measured. The results are given in  Table 2 . All of the synthesized topical emulsions were homogeneous, characterized by a light color and a delicate odor, typical of the raw materials used. The gel, on the other hand, was a homogeneous, semi-transparent, and opalescence product without any odor ( Figure S1 ). The appearance of the initial formulations did not differ from that of the formulations after the introduction of 10 wt.% of  Centella asiatica  L. extract. Also, the density of all products was similar and oscillated around the value of 1 g/mL. As can be seen in  Table 2 , the pH of the obtained formulations ranges from 5.45 and 5.32 for the O/W and W/O emulsions, respectively, to a value of 4.93 for the gel. These differences are mainly due to the ingredients used to obtain the products. The introduction of the extract results in a slight decrease in the pH value of all formulations. The lower pH of the gel is most likely due to the Instathix ®  thickener used, which is based on a lactic acid derivative. As shown, topical formulations of an acidic nature can lower the pH of the skin without destroying its protective barrier [ 44 ]. Additionally, we may assume that the higher acidity of the gel-based formulation can have a positive effect on the skin affected by atopy, where pH is usually elevated. This was demonstrated in a recent study by Andrew et al., where the use of a formulation with pH = 4.0 helped to maintain the acidic pH of the skin surface and supported the delivery of physiologic lipids, giving a reduction in sensitivity to irritants and allergens, which is typical to atopic dermatitis [ 45 ]. Nevertheless, the pH of all formulations obtained is within the range considered to be the optimal pH of the human skin, i.e., 4.1–5.8 [ 46 ]. Due to their physicochemical form and the raw materials used, the resulting formulations differed markedly in viscosity, reaching 605.40 cP for the O/W emulsion and 6548.20 cP for the W/O emulsion ( Table 2 ). Moreover, these values decreased noticeably when 10 wt.% of  Centella asiatica  L. extract was added to the formulation, yielding 394.20 cP and 4993.60 cP for the O/W and W/O emulsion, respectively. Such high viscosity values for W/O emulsions are mainly due to the fact that the formulations rich in oils and lipids naturally generate higher viscosity products. In addition, most commercially available viscosity modifiers are soluble in the aqueous phase, and their performance in the W/O emulsions is limited. Viscosity-modifying agents influence the microscopic structure of the formulation, like droplet size distribution, which, in turn, impacts the macroscopic behavior of the product. Many other parameters can also affect the final viscosity of the resulting products, including the speed of the rotation and temperature during homogenization [ 47 ].