2.1.1. Sustainability of the Topical Formulations During the development and preparation of carriers for saponin triterpenoids derived from  Centella asiatica  L., special emphasis was paid on replacing conventional raw materials with their substitutes obtained in accordance with the green chemistry principles, derived from the food industry by-products, and characterized by high values of biodegradability (at least 60% in 28 days, according to OECD methods). Moreover, low toxicity to aquatic organisms was also taken into account. It was not only to follow the requirements of the modern cosmetic market but also to take into account the potential applications of the obtained products as cosmetics for atopic skin. Emulsions and gel were obtained with COSMOS-approved raw materials, meeting the requirements of Ecocert standards. Therefore, the obtained topical formulations can be recognized as sustainable [ 42 ]. They contain vegan ingredients of natural origin that were obtained by physical, biotechnological, or chemical methods in accordance with the principles of green chemistry. At least 10% of all raw materials used in each formulation come from upcycling of agro-food by-products. For example, Tocomix L70-IP Organic CO contains tocopherols with antioxidant properties derived from by-products in the refinery process of soybean oil, whereas polymeric emollient Citropol H was obtained from side-stream turpentine generated during the paper-making process. Moreover, E-Leen green C is a vegetal-based preservative that contains 100% renewable carbon. It shows two-in-one action, namely, it protects formulations against microbiological contamination, especially from bacteria and yeasts, and it has a beneficial effect on the skin epidermal barrier thanks to its moisturizing and re-fatting properties. Besides pentylene glycol, it also contains glyceryl caprylate/caprate, serving as a humectant and a non-ionic co-emulsifying emollient that is mild to the skin. On the other hand, the hemp oil used in the manufacturing of Galehemp ®  OW is certified as a non-psychoactive ingredient according to European regulations, as it comes from the European type of hemp, which is a non-psychoactive plant (THC less than 0.2 wt.%). The details regarding the origin of the raw materials, their production methods, biodegradability, and toxicity to aquatic organisms are presented in  Table 1 . When designing and processing sustainable carriers of active substances, both in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries, low energy consumption is essential for reducing the carbon footprint in the environment and should become a standard. For this reason, we have developed three types of sustainable topical carriers for madecassoside and asiaticoside, namely O/W and W/O emulsions and gel, which were obtained by cold processes. Cold-processed emulsions are more difficult to stabilize due to the lack of possibility of using solid wax thickeners in the oil phase. Therefore, other solutions are required to obtain a stable product. A thorough screening of the raw materials market allowed us to select and test modern non-ionic emulsifiers, which enabled us to perform the cold emulsification process. The non-ionic EWO emulsifier was selected for obtaining W/O emulsion because of its natural origin and ability to stabilize such systems. Moreover, it gives a long-lasting moisturizing effect, and it is characterized by good compatibility with sensitive skin, which is especially important in cosmetic products dedicated to people suffering from atopic dermatitis. On the other hand, the non-ionic emulsifier Galehemp OW was applied during O/W emulsion synthesis. Apart from its emulsifying properties, it provides emollient and moisturizing properties. As one of the few O/W emulsifiers, it is suitable for preparing cold-processed emulsions. Cold-processed emulsification with non-ionic emulsifiers did not require the thermal energy normally used to heat the phases of emulsions and only mechanical energy for the dispersion of droplets and their homogenization was necessary. As a result, energy consumption and economic costs for obtaining emulsion-type carriers for testing controlled release of madecassoside and asiaticoside were significantly reduced. In the case of preparing gel-type carriers highly efficient in the cold process, natural polymers, such as xanthan gum, alginate, and tapioca starch, were used. By paying special attention to the environmental aspects of designing and formulation of topical carriers, we were also able to respond to the global trends and the European Green Deal principles, which assume that the EU economy will become zero-emission by 2050 [ 43 ]. In addition, the implementation of low-energy processing during emulsion synthesis is cost-efficient because it allows us to reduce the emulsification temperature by more than 50 °C when compared to the conventional processes commonly used in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries. According to Raposo et al., cold emulsification gives a reduction of 67% in electrical, 36.7% in water, and 17.1% in total production expenses when compared to the hot process [ 34 ].