2.2.3. Kinetics of Madecassoside and Asiaticoside Release The quantitative interpretation of the results obtained during release tests can be supported with mathematical equations and kinetic models in which the released amount of the substance tested is expressed as a function of the test time. Zero and first-order analysis, as well as Higuchi, Hixson–Crowell, and Korsmeyer–Peppas models, are usually used as analytical definitions of the Q(t) function. To assess the fitting of a model equation to the experimental data, the regression coefficient R 2  is commonly used with R 2  values close to 1, indicating the most suitable model of kinetics [ 62 ]. In the course of our study, four different kinetic models were evaluated for their fit with the experimental results obtained. As can be seen from the data in  Table 4  and  Figures S3 and S6 , for release studies from samples based on O/W support, the dominant role plays the Korsmeyer–Peppas model, for which the fit expressed as the R 2  value is the highest and ranges between 0.9985 and 0.9665. Moreover,  n  values of all formulations following the Korsmeyer–Peppas model are within the range of 0.6650 to 0.8879, indicating non-Fickian diffusion [ 62 ]. This semiempirical model relates exponentially the drug release to the elapsed time, and it is used to evaluate the release of the active substance when the release mechanism is not well recognized or when more than one type of release phenomenon can be involved. However, the Hixson–Crowell model also shows a high degree of fit, which is particularly evident in the release of asiaticoside. According to this model, the rate of release of active substances is limited by the dissolution rate rather than the diffusion through the matrix. Since asiaticoside has distinctly better solubility in non-polar systems, encapsulation in an O/W emulsion gives its higher concentration in the inner phase of the carrier. Thus, its release requires first entering the external phase of the emulsion, in which the solubility of asiaticoside is lower. Only then will the substance be able to be released from the topical formulation at the target site. In general, the Hixson–Crowell model applies to systems where the dissolution occurs parallel to the surface and the carrier’s dimensions diminish proportionally while keeping constant the initial geometrical form throughout all the release tests. A plot of the cubic root of the unreleased fraction of active substance vs. time will be linear if the equilibrium conditions are not reached and if the geometrical shape of the carrier form diminishes proportionally over time [ 63 ]. It can be assumed that an O/W emulsion, the outer phase of which is composed of hydrophilic substances, can partially degrade during dissolution tests. Hence the better fit of the Hixson–Crowell model in the case of asiaticoside release, especially when it was introduced into the carrier at a higher concentration ( Table 4 ). These results are in good agreement with the report of Matos et al., where the release of active compounds from  Acanthus mollis  L. leaf extract embedded in oil-in-water topical formulation was investigated [ 64 ]. Evaluating the results of the controlled release of madecassoside and asiaticoside from W/O emulsion as support ( Table 5 ), it can be concluded that each of the active substances follows a different kinetic model. Madecassoside release pattern gives a good fit with the Korsmeyer–Peppas model ( Figure S4 ), especially when a higher concentration of this substance is introduced ( Figure S7 ). Values of the  n  parameter reach 0.6024 and indicate anomalous transport of madecassoside, which is released according to the non-Fickian diffusion [ 62 ]. Moreover, due to the localization of madecassoside in the deeper parts of the carrier, the effect of the concentration of the active ingredient on the release kinetics is clearly visible. Due to its better solubility in water, madecassoside is encapsulated mostly in droplets of the dispersed phase. Therefore, its amount penetrating into the external phase of the carrier at lower concentrations makes that even for the best kinetic model (Korsmeyer–Peppas), the R 2  correlation parameter reaches only 0.9527 and 0.9005 for tests conducted at an acceptor medium with pH = 5.8 and pH = 7.4, respectively. Nevertheless, as the loading of the carrier with the active substance increases to 5 wt.% of madecassoside, the fitting parameter R 2  exceeds 0.9974 ( Table 5 ). Also, values of the  n  parameter increase and may indicate the anomalous diffusion, which is controlled by more than one process. On the contrary, for asiaticoside release from W/O emulsion, a good fit with the Higuchi model can be observed, which proves that the release process is controlled by the diffusion of active substances through the carrier. Based on a pseudo-steady-state approach, a direct proportionality between the cumulative amount of the substance released and the square root of time can be plotted ( Figures S3 and S6 ). [ 65 ]. Taking into account the good solubility of asiaticoside in the non-polar systems, the outer phase of the emulsion acts as a reservoir with prolonged release toward the acceptor fluid and reaches a pseudo-infinite dose release model. This observation is in good correlation with previously obtained results for active substances released from emulsion-based systems [ 59 , 66 , 67 ]. In the case of the gel-based carrier, kinetic parameters follow a pattern similar to that observed for samples based on the O/W emulsion. For madecassoside release studies, the Korsmeyer–Peppas model plays the dominant role, as the fit expressed as the R 2  value is the highest and ranges between 0.9974 and 0.9823. Also,  n  values are within the range of 0.5670 to 0.7148, indicating non-Fickian diffusion ( Table 6 ). However, the Hixson–Crowell model can also be considered, as it specifically addresses the fact that the surface of a carrier often changes with time. This can be likely observed in a hydrogel-based carrier supported by natural polymers. The use of this type of carrier in an aqueous acceptor medium that easily penetrates and erodes the polymeric matrix makes it easy to release the substance in the case of water-soluble madecassoside. Moreover, it can be assumed that the release from the carrier to the acceptor medium is fast, and the whole process is controlled mainly by diffusion through the matrix [ 64 ]. On the contrary, in the case of asiaticoside, whose solubility in aqueous media is lower, the penetration of the acceptor medium deep into the matrix and its swelling begin to play a key role, as the diffusion through the matrix becomes the main parameter controlling the release of the active substance [ 68 ]. Therefore, the Hixson–Crowell is the best model describing the release of asiaticoside from the gel-based topical formulation ( Figures S5 and S8 ).