2.1.3. Stability Tests of O/W and W/O Emulsions and Gel with  Centella asiatica  L. Extract The accelerated stability testing gives some predictions of long-term product stability under ambient conditions in shorter time periods. Storage of topical formulations at conditions exceeding ambient temperature can result in significant changes in their physical characteristics, namely particle size, rheology, and product structure. These changes significantly influence the stability of the product and are, among others, due to fluctuations in the components’ solubility, such as rheology-modifying agents or variations in the size of particulates and emulsion droplets [ 48 ]. Consequently, one of the parameters determining the stability of cosmetic emulsions is the uniform dispersion of their internal phase. An image of the emulsion particles (droplets) size distribution (PSD) can be obtained by the measurements based on the laser diffraction. The results of such measurements carried out for emulsions containing 10 wt.% of  Centella asiatica  L. extract are shown in  Figure 1 . For all O/W emulsion-based samples, a clearly bimodal PSD of the dispersed phase could be observed ( Figure 1 a) with a first maximum around 1 µm and the second one ranging from 76.0 µm (t = 84 days) to 144.5 µm (t = 0). Moreover, no drastic changes in the PSD can be detected when the emulsion is stored at elevated temperatures. It can be seen that the smaller droplets of the internal phase were stabilized very well by the emulsifiers used. More distinct changes can only be noticed in the PSD of larger droplets and for measurements taken immediately after preparation of emulsion (t = 0) and after 14 days of its storage at 45 °C, resulting in the peak maximum shift from 144.5 µm to 91.0 µm. After the emulsion was stabilized by the emulsifiers used, subsequent measurements showed a stable droplet size distribution of the dispersed phase. The results show that stable products were obtained in which the formulation components, as well as the emulsification and homogenization conditions, were properly selected. As Kim et al. have shown, a suitable selection of these elements is vital for the stability of O/W emulsions, since a high shear mixing rate in emulsification may induce Brownian flocculation, which, in turn, accelerates the coalescence of tiny droplets, leading to a decrease in the long-term stability of the cosmetic O/W emulsion [ 49 ]. In contrast, a wider particle size distribution (0.1–60.0 µm) was obtained for the W/O emulsion-based product ( Figure 1 b), with two marked maxima at about 0.6 µm and 8.0 µm. A more pronounced difference can be observed between the freshly obtained emulsion and the emulsion stored for 14 days at elevated temperature, for which the peak maxima shift from 0.35 µm and 10.0 µm (t = 0) to 0.50 µm and 6.5 µm (t = 14 days). Moreover, for samples stored for 56 days and 84 days, a minor tendency toward agglomeration of the inner phase droplets can be assumed, as manifested by the appearance of small peaks at values of about 100 µm and 550 µm. Such an unfavorable increase in the particle size of the dispersed phase, which can affect the stability of the product, is caused not only by an increase in the absolute size of individual droplets (coalescence), but it may also involve the formation of aggregated structures of the dispersed phase, which consequently increase effective droplet size. This phenomenon, called flocculation, can be induced by many factors and is difficult to predict, although it is very often triggered by large differences in the density of the emulsion’s two phases [ 48 ]. Given this, a slightly higher tendency in W/O emulsion to destabilize over time may be anticipated when compared with its O/W counterpart. Another parameter to assess the stability of the emulsion is zeta potential (ZP), which determines the repulsive forces of particles in the colloidal systems. Zeta potential analysis is performed based on ELS phenomena and measures electrophoretic mobility, which is the speed of movement of charged particles suspended in a liquid under the influence of an electric field. Then the electrophoretic mobility is converted into a zeta potential value, which can be used as a measure of the colloidal system’s stability [ 50 ]. Suspension samples with ZP greater than ±30 mV may be considered moderately stable, whereas ZP value close to zero suggest instability resulting from flocculation or coagulation processes. In general, the higher the zeta potential, the more probable the preservation of dispersion stability [ 51 ]. In the course of our research, the zeta potential was measured for samples of cosmetic emulsions and gel containing  Centella asiatica  L. extract immediately after their preparation and during their storage for 84 days under elevated temperature conditions (45 °C). Thus, the long-term stability of the obtained sustainable cold-processed topical formulations containing madecassoside and asiaticoside of  Centella asiatica  L. origin could be evaluated. As follows from the data in  Figure 2 , the emulsion-based samples immediately after preparation were characterized by satisfactory stability, as reflected by ZP values of −33.5 mV and −36.6 mV for W/O and O/W samples, respectively. Moreover, these values (expressed as modulus) increased over time and after 84 days reached −43.2 mV and −59.4 mV for W/O and O/W samples, respectively. Higher ZP values indicate stronger electrostatic interactions, so particles of the dispersed phase of the colloidal system undergoing such interactions will be strongly separated from each other, and this will result in higher dispersion stability. The highest stability, expressed as ZP value, was obtained for O/W cold-processed emulsion, which indicates the proper choice of emulsifier. This is worth noting, as the stabilization of this type of system is challenging without the classic emulsifiers normally used in the hot-processed emulsions. Thus, it can be concluded that the synthesized sustainable cold-processed W/O and O/W emulsions are long-term stable systems and can be used as carriers for active substances such as madecassoside and asiaticoside. The gel sample had slightly lower ZP values ranging between −21.3 mV and −28.9 mV for the initial sample and the sample stored at 45 °C for 84 days, respectively ( Figure 2 ). However, in the case of gels, such ZP values may also indicate a satisfactory level of stability. Gels constitute a specific example of colloids, as they are formed when there are so many particles of the dispersed phase present that they form a spatial network. Additional stabilization of the dispersed phase particles can be achieved by the chemical crosslinking reaction occurring in the case of gels formed by polymers. It is the case of the studied gel samples, as for the preparation of which natural polymers of plant origin, namely xanthan gum, alginate, and tapioca starch, were used. Therefore, gel-based formulations usually present a lower ZP value, as they are stabilized rather sterically than by electrostatic repulsions [ 52 ]. As such, despite ZP values that differ from those indicated in the literature for stable suspensions [ 51 ], the tested sustainable gel-based formulation can be used as a relatively stable carrier for active substances. As mentioned before, physical changes observed at accelerated testing at elevated temperatures can be beneficial in establishing the stability of a product. However, quite often the instability of a product is initially not visible to the human eye, which can result in a false positive assessment of its long-term stability. In this situation, one of the solutions is to use the measurement based on static light scattering, where the backward reflected light results from multiple scattering of the photons on the suspension particles (droplets). It enables the quantification of light backscattering and transmission values, as well as the prediction of the long-term stability of suspensions without any manipulation, dilution, or disruption of samples [ 53 ]. Based on the results of light backscattering and transmission measurements, calculation of the TSI (Turbiscan stability index) parameter can be performed. TSI summarizes all the fluctuations of backscattering and transmission values in the sample and enables the evaluation of sedimentation, creaming, or flocculation occurrence. The changes in the TSI parameter in subsequent measurements indicate ongoing destabilization of the cosmetic sample. Consequently, the sample is stable when TSI tends toward zero and unstable when it reaches higher values [ 54 ]. Figure 3  shows the results of our tests of the static light scattering for O/W, W/O emulsions, and gel samples containing 10 wt.% of  Centella asiatica  L. extract and stored for 84 days at elevated temperature (45 °C). The presented curves indicate some differences in the stability of the topical formulations obtained. The O/W emulsion-based sample appears as the most stable system, as the TSI parameter does not change throughout the accelerated stability test. At the initial stage of the study, the gel-based sample was also characterized by low TSI values, but after 30 days of storage, its stability deteriorated, as manifested by an increase in TSI values from 3.8 to 8.9 and a progressive increase in the value of this parameter up to TSI = 15.7 after 84 days. This is probably due to changes in the charge of the thickening agent used, which makes the repulsion forces in the gel matrix smaller, and therefore, the aggregation of particles may occur. Similar observations were also made by Ziółkowska et al. in the formulations based on carrageenan and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) [ 55 ]. Our assumption can also be confirmed by the results of zeta potential measurements ( Figure 2 ), where a change in the plot after 30 days of the sample’s storage is visible. Nevertheless, a certain degree of stabilization may still be provided by the dense packing of the gel network stabilized by the organic polymers present in the thickener used [ 52 ]. W/O emulsion appears to be the least stable system, as manifested by the steadily increasing value of the TSI parameter, which reaches 27.7 after 84 days of the accelerated stability test. This reduced stability was already indicated by measurements of the particle size distribution ( Figure 1 b), where additional peaks appeared in the range of higher values of PSD, indicating the beginning of the flocculation for samples stored for 56 and 84 days at elevated temperature. The larger the droplet size, the higher the velocity of creaming or sedimentation processes exhibited by increased TSI values. All these phenomena are disadvantageous to the emulsion’s long-term stability.