2.2.2. Controlled Release Profiles The foundation of the dissolution test was set at the end of the 19th century by Noyes and Whitney and applied to the diffusion-controlled dissolution process. However, up to this date, several other models of dissolution have been proposed [ 56 ]. As such, testing the release of triterpenoids from  Centella asiatica  L. can be a valuable source of information on the selection of the best type of carrier, the concentration of the active substance, and pH values, at which madecassoside and asiaticoside obtain optimal release profiles. During our research, a methodology based on spikes with active substance standards was used. The prepared cosmetic formulations were enriched with 2 wt.% and 5 wt.% of madecassoside and asiaticoside and subjected to dissolution tests in two different buffer solutions at pH = 5.8 and pH = 7.4. Interestingly, as can be seen from the graphs in  Figure 4 , the introduction of larger amounts of active substances does not increase their cumulative release from the cosmetic matrix. Giuliano et al. also observed a similar correlation in the release profiles of rutin from Poloxamer 407-based hydrogels, which was not influenced by the increasing amount of active ingredient introduced into the cosmetic matrix [ 57 ]. Soe et al. indicate in their study that this might be explained in terms of the viscosity and the particle size of the carrier [ 58 ]. Nevertheless, the influence of the formulation type on the release profile is evident ( Figure 4 ), indicating the O/W emulsion as the best carrier for the controlled release of triterpenoids tested. The highest amounts of madecassoside and asiaticoside were released from this system (≈90% and ≈40%, respectively) during 1440 min (24 h) of the test run. The second carrier that allowed the release of significant amounts of active substances was a gel, from which ≈80% and ≈40% of madecassoside and asiaticoside, respectively, were finally released. The least favorable environment for the release of triterpenoids found in  Centella asiatica  L. extract is created by the W/O emulsion. This is most likely due to the high viscosity of this matrix, as indicated by the data in  Table 2 . Increased viscosity of the matrix inhibits migration of the active substance to the boundary layer; hence, diffusion through the carrier may become the main parameter controlling the release processes. A similar relationship was observed by Dymek et al. when they studied the release of astaxanthin from different types of emulsions in topical application [ 59 ]. When comparing the release profiles of active substances from different emulsions, it is clear that the release of madecassoside, which has good solubility in hydrophilic systems, is favored by the more hydrophilic nature of the carrier. On the other hand, for W/O emulsions, in which the outer phase is lipophilic in nature, the difference between released madecassoside and asiaticoside is the smallest, which is due to the better solubility of asiaticoside in lipophilic systems, resulting in its easier access to the acceptor medium. Since the physiology of atopic skin is strongly disturbed by the inflammation processes, it is commonly characterized by deviations in pH values [ 40 , 41 ]. Thus, when studying the release of active substances, the effect of the acceptor medium pH on the release profile should be considered [ 8 ]. In our study, the pH values of the acceptor solutions were selected in relation to the pH values of skin affected by atopic dermatitis (pH = 7.4) and healthy skin (pH = 5.8). Based on the correlations depicted in  Figure 4 , it can be seen that the influence of the acceptor medium pH is particularly marked in the case of the release of asiaticoside, making it possible to obtain higher release values of this substance at pH = 7.4. This may be advantageous in the care of atopic skin, especially at the beginning of the treatment, when the pH is still elevated due to the inflammatory processes taking place in the skin. With this course of asiaticoside release, it will be possible to apply its significant amounts, which will promote the leveling of inflammation and lowering of skin pH. Furthermore, the topical formulations we have prepared are characterized by a pH close to 5 ( Table 2 ), which will naturally lower the pH of atopic skin during the treatment and promote the restoration of the skin’s natural acidic barrier. As can be seen from the release profiles shown in  Figure 4 , lowering the pH will slightly reduce the amount of asiaticoside released but will still promote the release of the second active ingredient, namely madecassoside. Our study not only gives information on the degree of released madecassoside and asiaticoside, but at the same time indicates good stability of these substances in the tested pH ranges. It is in good agreement with the results obtained by Puttarak et al., who also found that madecassoside and asiaticoside are rather stable in acidic and neutral pH and decompose under basic conditions with pH as high as 8.2 [ 60 ]. Thus, it can be considered that the topical formulations containing  Centella asiatica  L. extract obtained in the course of our study will enable comprehensive care of skin affected by atopy and with disturbed pH. The trends described above were also confirmed by the data in  Table 4 ,  Table 5  and  Table 6 , which include the t 20%  and X 480min  parameters, indicating, respectively, the time at which the cumulative release value reached 20% and the release percentage achieved after 480 min of the dissolution test. It shows that the fastest 20% release of madecassoside was achieved for the W/O emulsion. In contrast, 480 min (8 h) after application of the formulation to the skin, the highest release from the O/W formulation can be expected, namely 48.3% and 15.2% for madecassoside and asiaticoside, respectively. The release values we achieved, especially those after 480 min (8 h), which is the time the formulation is usually kept on the skin during the day, should be considered satisfactory, given the data available in the literature. For example, Suksaeree et al. revealed low content of madecassoside and asiaticoside released from film-forming polymeric solutions (FFPS) using a Franz-type diffusion cell. The maximum release of madecassoside and asiaticoside after 8 h of testing was 13.4 and 14.8%, respectively [ 26 ]. In vitro experiments performed by Soe et al. demonstrated that the release of asiaticoside from in situ-created gel formulations through a semi-permeable membrane in the modified Franz diffusion cell does not exceed 10% after 8 h of testing [ 58 ]. On the other hand, in vitro release of asiaticoside from nanostructured lipid carriers containing dried (NLC-D) and glycolic (NLC-G)  Centella asiatica  L. extracts showed that after 8 h the release from NLC-D was approximately 20%, while release from NLC-G was 2-times higher during the same period of time [ 23 ]. In addition, a study by Suwantong et al. demonstrates that after 8 h of dissolution tests at 37 °C with electrospun cellulose acetate fiber mats containing asiaticoside, it is possible to achieve about 25% of asiaticoside cumulative release [ 29 ]. In a study conducted by Chowdahalli et al., the release of asiaticoside from solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) incorporated in hydrogel was investigated by using the dialysis bag method. The release of asiaticoside in a sustained manner during 8 h was confirmed, and the amount of released substance was 88% [ 22 ]. High values of asiaticoside cumulative release after 8 h (approximately 50% to 60%) were also shown by Wichayapreechar et al. They used the dialysis method in phosphate buffered saline and applied it to niosomes and hyaluronic acid-modified niosomes loaded with  Centella asiatica  L. extract [ 61 ]. Contrary, Suhail et al. performed in vitro assessment of chitosan-based polymeric pH-responsive nanogels for sustained delivery of madecassoside, obtaining approximately 60% of cumulative release after 8 h of testing at pH = 7.4 [ 8 ]. Moreover, Lu et al. conducted an in vitro study of madecassoside release from nanoemulsions and showed that around 65% of madecassoside was released after 8 h [ 21 ].