3.3. Physicochemical Properties and Stability Test of Cold-Processed Cosmetic Emulsions and Gel The initial physicochemical properties, namely pH value, viscosity, and density of the emulsions and gel with 10 wt.% of  Centella asiatica  L. extract, were investigated. The pH values were assessed with a Fisherbrand™ Accumet AB 150 pH-meter (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Viscosity was evaluated using a DV2T viscometer (AMETEK Brookfield, Middleboro, MA, USA) equipped with a small sample adapter. The spindle no. SC4-29 (for W/O emulsion) and the spindle no. SC4-21 (for O/W emulsion and gel) were used. Density was measured using a P-1 metal pycnometer (Pol-Zaf s.c., Wrocław, Poland). All the measurements were done in triplicate, and the averaged values with SD ( n  = 3) were reported. Additionally, parameters such as color, smell, and appearance of the cosmetic formulations were also evaluated organoleptically. Stability of the cosmetic formulations was investigated by a variety of techniques, such as laser diffraction (LD), electrophoretic light scattering (ELS), and static multiple light scattering (SMLS). All of the tests were conducted directly after the preparation of the samples as well as after their incubation for 2–3 months at 45 °C, regarding both pure cosmetic carriers and their counterparts containing active substances, namely madecassoside and asiaticoside. The particle size distributions of the emulsions were analyzed by means of LD technique using Mastersizer 2000 apparatus (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Malvern, UK) with a wet dispersion unit. For each sample, the measurements were repeated five times. Before the analysis, the refractive index of each sample was determined by using the Refracto™ 30GS portable refractometer (Mettler Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland). Zeta potential was quantified using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS analyzer (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., UK), which operates under the ELS technique. Prior to the measurement, 0.05 g of emulsion or gel was suspended in 5 g of distilled water by using an ultrasonic bath, and the resulting mixture was further diluted (60 µL of emulsions or 120 µL of gel in 15 mL of H 2 O) to avoid multiple scattering effects. The samples were then placed in the suitable PS cuvettes and subjected to ELS measurements at 25 °C using the Smoluchowski model. The resulting values ( n  = 10) were then averaged, and the standard deviation was calculated. The Turbiscan LAB  Expert device (Formulaction, Toulouse, France) was used to evaluate the backscattering (ΔBS) and transmission (ΔT) profiles of emulsions and gel-based formulations as a function of incubation time at elevated temperature (45 °C). The samples tested were placed directly into calibrated borosilicated cylindrical glass vials with stoppers and scanned from bottom to top for a total of 5 min, with one scan at every 30 s ( n  = 10). The obtained data were processed by a Turby Soft 2.0 software and reported as Turbiscan Stability Index (TSI) vs. time. TSI is a statistical parameter that can be used to estimate the stability of samples. It is expressed by the following Equation (1): (1) T S I t = 1 N h ∑ t 1 = 1 t m a x ∑ z i = z m i n z m a x B S T t i , z i − B S T ( t i − 1 , z i ) 
where:  N h  = [( z max  −  z min )/Δ h ]—the number of height positions in the selected zone of the scan;  t max —the measurement point corresponding to the time t at which the  TSI  is calculated;  z min  and  z max —the lower and upper selected height limits, respectively;  BST —the considered signal (BS if T < 0.2%, T otherwise) [ 72 ].