4. Summary During our study, sustainable cold-processed topical formulations supporting the treatment of atopic dermatitis were obtained. Different types of carriers were designed, taking into account the needs of atopic skin. The W/O emulsion contained the largest amount of emollients (31%); the O/W emulsion contained 21% of emollients, whereas the gel did not contain emollients. All carriers were obtained with carefully selected sustainable raw materials and by using low-energy processes that eliminate heating of the components. Stability tests showed that the formulations obtained had good stability, especially the O/W system, which showed no major changes in the particle size of the dispersed phase even after 84 days of storage at elevated temperatures. For emulsions obtained by the cold process, obtaining good stability is difficult due to the limited number of emulsifiers operating at ambient temperatures. Nevertheless, low temperature supports the stability of the active substances introduced, as our accelerated stability tests showed that madecassoside and asiaticoside introduced into cold-processed formulations were characterized by good stability even during storage at elevated temperatures. In addition, factors influencing release profiles from different carriers, such as active substance concentration and pH of the acceptor medium, have been tested, considering the physiology of atopic skin and its needs. The pH values of acceptor media were selected in relation to the pH values observed in the healthy skin (pH = 5.8) as well as the skin with atopic dermatitis (pH = 7.4). The results showed that the pH value of the acceptor medium did not play a significant role during the release study of madecassoside. In contrast, it becomes apparent in the case of asiaticoside release. However, such complementarity can be a major advantage for products designed for atopic skin, in which pH is disturbed. Moreover, regardless of the type of carrier, increasing the concentration of active ingredients from 2 wt.% to 5 wt.% did not affect the cumulative release of madecassoside and asiaticoside. The largest amounts of madecassoside were released from carriers with a large amount of hydrophilic phase, as the amount of lipid-based emollients present in the formulation regulates the viscosity of the carrier and consequently influences the release profiles. The varied physicochemical properties of the carriers and the active substances caused that the release profiles followed different mechanisms, indicating that more than one type of release phenomenon can be involved. Our study shows that the kinetics and release profiles of triterpenoids from  Centella asiatica  L. may provide important information on the most optimal type of carrier, the pH of the medium, and the concentration of the active substance. Furthermore, they indicate that the synthesized formulations can be successfully used as carriers of triterpenoids present in  Centella asiatica  L. extract. Furthermore, it is important to point out that obtaining madecassoside and asiaticoside carriers in a low-temperature process undoubtedly promotes the durability of both the active substances and the lipid-based substances (emollients) used, of which a significant amount is advisable for products intended for atopic skin.