Guidance
Check if your drink is liable for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy
Find out which drinks are liable for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy, and how much you may need to pay.
From:
HM Revenue & Customs
Published:
3 April 2018
Last updated:
25 March 2026
            —
See all updates
Get emails about this page
Contents
Drinks that the levy applies to
Drinks that are not liable for the levy
How much you’ll pay
When the levy is due on liable drinks
Who pays the levy
Who needs to register for the levy
Print this page
Before you register for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy, you need to know if the drinks you produce, package, own the brand of, or bring into the UK are liable for the levy. If they’re not, you do not need to register.
If you only dispense drinks into a cup, glass or take away cup, you’re not classed as a packager and do not need to pay the levy.
Drinks that the levy applies to
A drink is liable for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy if it meets all of the following conditions:
it has had sugar added during production, or anything (other than fruit juice, vegetable juice and milk) that contains sugar, such as honey
it contains at least 5 grams (
g
) of sugar per 100 millilitres (
ml
) in its ready to drink or
diluted form
it’s either ready to drink, or to be drunk it must be diluted with water, mixed with crushed ice or processed to make crushed ice, mixed with carbon dioxide, or a combination of these
it’s bottled, canned or otherwise packaged so it’s ready to drink or be diluted
it has a content of 1.2% alcohol by volume (
ABV
) or less
You’ll also need to pay the levy if the drink is a ‘flavour concentrate’.
You can reformulate your drinks to reduce the sugar content. This may either reduce or remove your drinks’ liability to the levy.
What’s classed as sugar
For the purposes of the Soft Drinks Industry Levy, sugar includes (but is not limited to):
sucrose
glucose
fructose
lactose
galactose
It does not include sugar replacements, like:
stevia
aspartame
sucralose
Flavour concentrates
You need to pay the Soft Drinks Industry Levy for liable flavour concentrates packaged in or brought into the UK from 1 April 2023.
A flavour concentrate is a packaged liquid flavouring placed into a dispensing machine to be mixed with sugar, or other ingredients, which is then combined with water, carbon dioxide or crushed ice to dispense a drink directly to a consumer. Other ingredients may include artificial sweeteners and other flavour concentrates.
You have to pay the levy if, when combined and mixed in a dispensing machine, the dispensed soft drink contains at least 5g of sugar per 100ml and has a content of 1.2%
ABV
or less.
Work out the levy for flavour concentrates
Flavour concentrates will have dispensing instructions which will tell you how much levy you’ll pay based on the sugar content per 100ml of the dispensed drink. The instructions will also tell you the volume of dispensed drink the flavour concentrate can make.
If you use 2 or more concentrates to make the dispensed drink, the liability to the levy will be apportioned between each of the flavour concentrates.
You’ll need to know the number of concentrates used to produce the finished drink and the volume each concentrate makes before you declare.
For example volume divided by 2 where there are 2 flavour concentrates, or volume divided by 3 where there are 3 flavour concentrates.
Example
Flavour concentrates A and B are mixed together with added sugar when they are dispensed. Each flavour concentrate is capable of producing 20 litres of dispensed drink when combined.
The apportionment is the total dispensed volume divided by the number of flavour concentrates, so 20 divided by 2.
When declaring the volume for flavour concentrate A, you would declare 10 litres on your Soft Drinks Industry Levy return.
When declaring the volume for flavour concentrate B, you would declare 10 litres on your Soft Drinks Industry Levy return.
Drinks that are not liable for the levy
Liable drinks packaged or brought into the UK before 6 April 2018 are not included in the levy.
The levy does not apply to drinks that are:
at least 75% milk
a milk substitute, like soya or almond milk
an alcohol replacement, like de-alcoholised beer or wine
made with fruit juice or vegetable juice and do not have any other added sugar
liquid drink flavouring that’s added to food or drinks like coffee or cocktails
sold as a powder
prepared by mixing liquids and served in an open container, like cocktails
infant formula, follow on formula or baby foods
formulated food intended as a total diet replacement, or dietary food used for special medical purposes
Milk and milk based drinks
For your drink to be classed as milk or a milk based drink, it must contain at least 75ml of milk per 100ml of prepared drink.
For the purposes of the levy, types of milk include:
milk from an animal
reconstituted or recombined milk
fermented milk
buttermilk
whey
reconstituted or recombined whey
Cream is not included in the definition of milk.
Milk substitute drinks
For your drink to be classed as a milk substitute drink, it must:
contain at least 120 milligrams of calcium per 100ml
come from legumes, cereals, nuts, seeds or another type of plant
have all or most of the same uses as milk
have a similar consistency to milk
not be carbonated
Alcohol replacement drinks
For your drink to be classed as an alcohol replacement drink, it must be all of the following:
advertised and sold as a direct replacement for a particular type of alcoholic drink
in packaging that’s similar to the alcoholic drink it’s intended to replace
marketed in a way that’s similar to the alcoholic drink it’s intended to replace
not marketed in a way that targets or particularly appeals to people who are under the age of 18
Your drink must also be one or more of the following:
made from an alcoholic drink through de-alcoholisation, which reduces the
ABV
to 1.2% or lower
made by blending cider, beer, wine or other alcoholic drink with fruit juice (with or without the addition of water and other ingredients), to make a soft drink that’s similar to the alcoholic drink used in its production
made through fermentation or distillation, during which:
alcohol is produced
the
ABV
never goes over 1.2%
the drink is not diluted or mixed with anything else, apart from anything that’s been dissolved into the drink through distillation
What’s classed as fruit juice
For the purposes of the levy, fruit juice includes (but is not limited to):
fruit puree
dehydrated fruit juice
powdered fruit juice
It does not include de-ionised fruit juice or juice drinks with added sugar.
How much you’ll pay
The amount you’ll pay depends on which band your liable drink is in.
Use the:
lower rate for drinks with a total sugar content of 5g or more and less than 8g per 100ml
higher rate for drinks with a total sugar content of 8g or more per 100ml
From
Lower rate
Higher rate
1 April 2026
£2.08 per 10 litres
£2.78 per 10 litres
1 April 2025
£1.94 per 10 litres
£2.59 per 10 litres
6 April 2018
£0.18 per litre
£0.24 per litre
Find out more about the
annual increases to the Soft Drinks Industry Levy rates
.
When the levy is due on liable drinks
For liable drinks packaged in the UK, you need to
report the drinks in the same reporting period
that they leave the premises they were packaged in, unless they’re
moved to a registered warehouse
. In this case, the levy becomes due once the drinks leave the registered warehouse.
If the liable drinks are made available for sale (or free of charge) at any time, the levy becomes due at that point.
Find out more information about
who pays the levy on liable drinks brought into the UK
.
When drinks are classed as being made available for sale or free of charge
Drinks are considered to be ‘made available for sale’ (or free of charge) when they’re allocated to a particular supply to a customer.
Drinks that are stored as part of your general stock on hand are not considered to be made available.
Depending on your stock management system and your arrangements with your customers, your stock on hand may be allocated to a particular supply when they’re:
set aside in your premises
dispatched from your premises
delivered to your customer
Who pays the levy
For liable drinks packaged in the UK, the packager must report and pay the levy.
Find out more information about
who pays the levy on liable drinks brought into the UK
.
Who needs to register for the levy
Find out if you need to register
for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy.
Updates to this page
Published 3 April 2018
Last updated 25 March 2026
—
Show all updates
25 March 2026
New levy rates from 1 April 2026 have been added to the 'How much you'll pay' section.
17 January 2025
The page has been updated to notify of the increase to Soft Drinks Industry Levy from 1 April 2025.
12 April 2023
Information around flavour concentrates has been added which became liable for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy on 1 April 2023.
3 April 2018
First published.
Sign up for emails or print this page
Get emails about this page
Print this page
Contents
Related content
Detailed guidance
Bringing drinks liable for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy into the UK
Register for Soft Drinks Industry Levy
Check if you need to register for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy
Work out the sugar content of your diluted soft drink (notice 3)
Register a warehouse for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy
What you’ll be asked when you register for the Soft Drinks Industry Levy (notice 1)
Collection
Soft Drinks Industry Levy: detailed information
Explore the topic
Soft Drinks Industry Levy