Product • CAROB S.A.
Skip to primary navigation
Skip to main content
CAROB S.A.
About Us
Product
Quality
Gallery
News
Recipes
Contact Us
PRODUCT
CAROB, S.A.
has developed the
PALGUM
®
brand, a high quality locust bean gum produced from a precise selection process of carob seeds, peeled and ground with the most advanced technology.
The carob tree is a typical tree of the Mediterranean area resistant to drought and no need for the use of fertilizers or pesticides. This harvests seeds to the highest quality, also reflecting in our final product, the locust bean gum.
The production process has been adapted to respect the environment, reusing the by-products derived from the processing, resulting in a 100% natural product.
▸ POINTS OF SALE
Locust Beam Gum PALGUM
®
LOCUST BEAN GUM (LBG)
Locust bean gum belongs to a group of
hydrocolloids known as galactomannans
.  It comes from milling the endosperm of the carob seed.
This seed is made of three parts: the shell, a central protein part (the germ) and the endosperm, which the locust bean gum comes from.
The chemical structure of the locust bean gum provides a high thickener capacity, developing very viscous solution in an aqueous system. In combination with other hydrocolloids such as xanthan or carrageenan, presents synergism and develops
the ability to form gels
.
CAROB, S.A.
has developed its own brand
PALGUM
®
, the highest quality locust bean gum.
QUALITIES PALGUM
®
We manufacture locust bean gum under our brand
PALGUM
®
with a wide range of grades depending on the viscosity and the particle size. We also have gradation of color in our range, from the yellowish quality to the whitest and brightest qualities.
APPLICATIONS
PALGUM
®
Locust bean gum
Locust bean gum is one of the oldest hydrocolloids used in the food industry; it has functional properties such as thickener, stabilizer and gelling agent, providing a unique texture in a wide range of food systems.
Our process and our experience in the manufacture of locust bean gum makes our wide range
PALGUM
®
enhances the texture, performance and the efficiency in the final applications.
CONFECTIONERY
Improves texture and smoothness.
Provides greater firmness.
Extends shelf life, avoiding dryness and crumbling.
JAMS
Avoid water loss or syneresis.
Improves the ease of spreading.
ICE CREAMS
Prevents the formation of ice crystals.
Provides greater resistance to thermal shock.
Improves texture and palatability (mouthfeel).
Inhibits the loss of volume during storage.
CREAMY CHEESES
Accelerates coagulation.
Increase the yield of solid rennet (curd).
Retains water, providing a firm and spreadable texture.
Reduces exudation in fresh cheeses.
BABY FOOD
Thickening agent in infant foods.
Effective against digestive problems.
MEAT PRODUCTS
High water retention.
Bonding agent, stabilizer.
Helps to cut the meat.
Used in combination with carrageenan.
CUSTARD AND GELATINE
Improves the elasticity of carrageenan (synergism) with other hydrocolloids.
Prevents desiccation or loss of water.
Improves the cut of gelatine.
DRESSINGS AND SAUCES
Eliminates syneresis or water loss.
Facilitates the suspension of solids (herbs and spices).
Increases viscosity.
PET FOOD
Our PF-1000 product with a minimum viscosity of 1,000cps is a specific grade for the application of feed for pets.
Do you know the Locust Bean Gum?
▸ DISCOVER IT
Facebook
YouTube
Instagram
Twitter
© 2026 ·
CAROB S.A.
·
All rights reserved
Food Safety Policy
·
Privacy Policy
·
Privacy Policy on Social Networks
·
Legal notice
Website made by
La Nave Nodriza
Español
English
Scroll Up
Manage consent
To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.
Functional
Functional
Always active
The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network.
Preferences
Preferences
The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user.
Preferences
Preferences
The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes.
The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user.
Marketing
Marketing
The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes.
Manage options
Manage services
Manage {vendor_count} vendors
Read more about these purposes
Accept
Deny
View preferences
Save preferences
View preferences
{title}
{title}
{title}
Manage consent