Herbacel AQ Plus | Herbafood To be able to use Herbafood in full range, we recommend activating Javascript in your browser. Skip to content Search DE EN Products Product overview Functional and dietary fibers Coloring apple extract Low-viscosity pectins Apple pectin extracts Applications Trend topics Dairy products Milk alternatives Delicatessen Beverages Meat and sausages Meat alternatives Ice cream and sorbets Fruit preparations Baked products Instant lifestyle and health Info center About us Career News blog Newsletter Email us Menu Herbafood » Products » Functional and dietary fibers » Herbacel AQ Plus Herbacel® » AQ® Plus With decades of experience in the development and production of natural and highly functional fruit fibers, we set the standard in the industry with Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus. Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus is known for its outstanding functional properties and consistent quality. Whether texturizing, stabilizing, emulsifying or adjusting viscosity, Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus can help you develop products that meet your functional needs. » Herbacel® AQ® Plus are fibers obtained from freshly harvested, juiced (and de-oiled), and gently dried citrus fruits. The citrus fibers are characterized by very high water-binding and water-retaining capacities. These highly functional and neutral-tasting fruit fibers can emulsify and form smooth, soft textures. Benefits and positive properties of Herbacel® AQ® Plus Highly functional fruit fiber High water-binding capacity Optimal texturing Stable emulsions Excellent cold swelling properties Pulpiness and smooth mouthfeel Process-stable (heat-stable, shear-stable) Different particle sizes available Suitable for reformulation concepts (salt, fat and sugar reduction) Potential substitution of thickeners, stabilizers and emulsifiers Clean Labeling as “citrus fiber” Optimized Food for health-conscious consumers with multifunctional citrus fibers Reformulation of food products Food manufacturers are faced with the task of reformulating their existing products to meet the demands of changing food trends and the increasing demand for health-conscious options. The challenge here is to create full-bodied products with intense flavor, while reducing fat, sugar and salt content. Our HERBACEL® AQ® PLUS range meets all these requirements thanks to its excellent nutritional, functional and sensory properties. The benefits of our multifunctional citrus fibers therefore make HERBACEL® AQ® PLUS so valuable and versatile for food production. They unfold their effects where existing formulations need to be improved and reconsidered in terms of nutritional optimization. HERBACEL® AQ® PLUS meets the challenge of creating full-bodied foods with intense flavor, while reducing fat, sugar and salt content. Potential applications of Herbacel® AQ® Plus Dairy products Milk alternatives Delicatessen Beverages Meat and sausages Meat alternatives Ice cream and sorbets Fruit preparation and fruit fillings Baked products Instant products Brochures Certificates Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus und Herbacel® AQ® AFB Toast and sandwich bread with functional fruit fiber Herbacel® AQ® Plus Optimized and sugar-reduced orange juice drinks Herbacel® AQ® Plus Optimized tomato products with perfect mouthfeel Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus Texturizing plant-based yoghurt alternatives with functional citrus fibers Herbacel® AQ® Plus Texturising plant-based meat alternatives Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus For cream cheese preparations – Fat reduc­tion and high taste sensation Herbacel® AQ® Plus Improve your Nutri-Score rating with multifunctional fibres Herbacel® AQ® Plus Perfect ketchup – Get rid of sugar and salt without compromising on texture Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus-N and pectin Plant-based dairy alternative drinks with fibre and/or pectin Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus For adding texture to pulpy low calorie drinks based on fruit juice Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus Clean Labelling fruit based beverages with citrus fibers Herbacel® AQ® Plus Citrus Emulsions with citrus fibers - Clean Label and free from E numbers Food Safety System Certification 03.12.2025 — PDF: 987 KB Halal Quality Control Certificate 25.06.2026 — PDF: 2 MB Kosher Certificate 10.03.2026 — PDF: 899 KB ISO 50001 Certificate 24.06.2026 — PDF: 210 KB FDA Certificate 15.10.2024 — PDF: 1 MB Let's make food better! Legal Privacy policy T&Cs Newsletter Contact Social Media Herbafood Ingredients GmbH Phöbener Chaussee 12 14542 Werder (Havel) Germany Phone: +49 3327 785-202 Fax: +49 3327 785-201 Email: info@herbafood.de Contact us Google Maps News Enhanced texturizing with functional apple fibers Herbafood has widened its range of high functional fruit fibers and developed a… Continue reading Enhanced texturizing with functional apple fibers The family business Herbafood Ingredients GmbH, located in Havelland Brandenburg, is a member of the » H&F Group and a subsidiary of » Herbstreith & Fox GmbH & Co. KG in Neuenbürg, Baden-Württemberg. Contact Top WordPress Cookie Plugin by Real Cookie Banner