PromOat Oat Beta-glucan from Lantmännen Biorefineries Websites Swedish About Lantmännen Lantmännen Lantmännen is an agricultural cooperative and Northern Europe’s leader in agriculture, machinery, bioenergy and food products. Lantmännen Lantmännen Finans Lantmännen Fastigheter Agriculture The Agriculture Sector constitutes Lantmännen's core business and offers products and services to promote strong, competitive farming. Lantmännen Lantbruk Lantmännen Agro Machinery Imports, markets and sells agricultural machinery, spare parts and services. Lantmännen Maskin Energy The Energy Sector is Sweden’s largest producer of bioenergy products. Lantmännen Biorefineries Food The Food Sector develops, processes and markets products that include flour, breakfast foods, pasta, frozen and fresh bread, crispbread and ready-to-eat meals.​ Lantmännen Cerealia Lantmännen Unibake One big family Lantmännen is an agricultural cooperative founded on the deep knowledge our farmers have aquired over generations. We make farming thrive and work together to take responsibility from field to fork. From field to fork From our core farming business,  through the value chain, from field to fork, we are involved in every step from sowing to harvesting; to the food on our tables, feed for our livestock and climate –smart biofuels. Locally and globally Owned by Swedish farmers, Sweden is our base with the Baltic Sea area as our expanded domestic market. We have a strong international presence, and no matter which country and location we operate in, we always take the same responsibility. Research for the future We pursue research and invest in innovation for tomorrow’s agriculture, bioenergy and foods of the future. Innovations are crucial if we are to resolve the challenges of today and tomorrow, which is why Lantmännen also has its own research foundation. Look for the sprout You´ll find the Lantmännen sprout on our packaging. The products may be different, but everyone can feel safe that we also minimise impact on climate and people. If you find the sprout on a packet, you can be sure what’s inside is Good Food from Lantmännen. Biofuels Biofuels Lantmännen Biorefineries operates northern Europe's largest biorefinery. Read more Products Lantmannen Biorefineries produces ethanol. Some of it is used as fuel, while others are used for other technical applications such as windshield washer fluid. About Biofuels Our ethanol has perhaps the best climate performance in the world. In our plant, we can produce both grain-based ethanol and ethanol from second generation raw materials, so-called advanced biofuel. Kontakt Hör gärna av dig om du har frågor om våra produkter eller tjänster. More content Quality and sustainability News Biomaterials Biomaterials Biomaterials producerar produkter som teknisk stärkelse, koldioxid och teknisk etanol. Läs mer om varje produkter, kvalitet- och hållbarhetsarbete nedan. Read more Products Biomaterials produces products such as technical starch, carbon dioxide and technical ethanol. About Biomaterials Read more about each product, quality and sustainability. Kontakt Hör gärna av dig om du har frågor om våra produkter eller tjänster. More content Quality and sustainability News Feed Ingredients Feed Ingredients In our refining process, we seperate protein into destillers' dried grains and solubles. From this we make high-value protein feed that replaces imported soy in a climate-smart way. Läs mer Products Read more about our climate-smart and locally produced feed materials here. About Feed Ingredients The refining process converts cereal starch into ethanol. The protein becomes feed, mostly for cattle, and is returned to Swedish farms. Contact us Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. More content Quality and sustainability News Food Ingredients Food Ingredients Lantmännen Biorefineries develops and markets unique wheat and oat-based ingredients to manufacturers of food, beverages, dietary supplements and cosmetics. Read more Products Lantmännen Biorefineries develops and markets unique wheat and oat-based ingredients to manufacturers of food, beverages, dietary supplements and cosmetics. Applications Read more about the uses of our products and examples of applications. Contact Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. More content Quality and sustainability About Food Ingredients News About us About us Lantmännen Biorefineries is part of Lantmännen's energy division and consists of the production facilities in Lidköping, Norrköping and Kimstad. Läs mer Production facilities We process wheat and oats at our three sites in Norrköping, Lidköping and Kimstad. Job vacancies We continuously seek talented employees for Lantmännen Biorefineries. Learn more about available services and what working at Lantmännen is like. Innovation & Development We use innovation as a driver for a sustainable future. We lead the development of biorefineries and collaborate with universities and other research institutions in several areas. More content Quality and sustainability Contact Contact Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. Contact us Contact Food Ingredients Contact Biofuel, Biomaterials or Feed Ingredients News Search Lantmännen Biorefineries • • • Lantmännen Biorefineries Food Ingredients Products Oat beta-glu... PromOat PromOat Oat beta-glucan The natural, healthy, functional oat ingredient PromOat Oat beta-glucan is a high-concentration, soluble oat bran fibre, containing very little insoluble fibres. It is extracted from Swedish wholegrain oats without the use of chemicals. PromOat is a natural source of beta-glucan, the dietary fibre in oat bran that provides important health and functional benefits. In the body, oat beta-glucan helps to maintain healthy cholesterol levels, blood glucose levels and digestion. As a functional ingredient, it thickens and stabilizes emulsions and imparts an indulgent, creamy mouthfeel. PromOat is available in both conventional and gluten-free versions. Contact us for more information Benefits of PromOat PromOat Oat beta-glucan can give manufacturers and consumers access to healthy foods and beverages. Its beta-glucan content is up to 34%, which makes it easy to achieve the daily dosages required for specific health benefit claims. PromOat is also available as gluten-free. Its beta-glucan content is up to 29%. PromOat Oat beta-glucan is a clean-label fibre, produced from Nordic oats. It is soluble, clean-tasting, and neutral in colour. It can be used in food and beverage formulations for its health and functional benefits. PromOat can also thicken and stabilize emulsions and impart an indulgent creamy mouthfeel. PromOat is part of the range of oat ingredients produced by Lantmännen, which also includes PrOatein Oat protein and Avenacare Oat beta-glucan for cosmetics applications. Contact us Health benefits PromOat Oat beta-glucan – The natural, healthy, functional oat ingredient. PromOat, a unique soluble fibre ingredient from oats, gives your products access to the positive effects associated with oats, including promotion of healthy cholesterol levels, a low glycaemic response and healthy digestion. It is also a good source of additional fibre to a variety of food and drink products. Read more PromOat's Health Benefits Healthy blood glucose levels PromOat can be used on its own or in food and beverages, in order to help maintain healthy blood glucose levels. Research shows that consumption of beta-glucans from oats, as part of a meal, contributes to the reduction of blood glucose spikes after that meal. Healthy cholesterol levels PromOat can be used for its beneficial effect on heart health. In Europe, the following health claim for oat beta-glucan is approved: Oat beta-glucan has been shown to lower/reduce blood cholesterol. High cholesterol is a risk factor in the development of coronary heart disease. Healthy digestion PromOat can be used in food and beverages for its beneficial effects on digestive and intestinal health. In addition, it provides soluble fibres, which may help promote satiety and facilitate weight management. Applications PromOat Oat beta-glucan is soluble and has strong water-binding and emulsifying properties, creating a smooth texture and creamy mouthfeel in a variety of products. A natural component of whole grain Nordic oats, it can be applied in ‘clean label’ products for its texturing or nutritional properties. It can be applied in a variety of formulations and combined with other health ingredients. Read more about PromOat Applications Functional benefits Clean taste, neutral colour, no graininess – PromOat is produced as a creamy white, neutral tasting powder that integrates easily into recipes of various kinds. Soluble and clean – Ideal in, for example, beverages where it can also contribute to a perfect mouthfeel and smoothness. Stabiliser and viscosity modifier – Strong water-binding and emulsifying properties. It thickens and stabilises creamy emulsions, creating a smooth texture and an indulgent creamy mouthfeel. PromOat can be used as the only ingredient for this purpose or in combinations with hydrocolloids, gums and starches from ex. potato, wheat etc and other emulsifiers as well as stabilizers. Improved shelf-life – Baked products such as reduced fat muffins or cakes can get improved shelf-life due to improved moisture management through the use of PromOat. Easy to use and easy to handle – It Integrates easily in manufacturing conditions and is acid and heat stable. Fat substitute – Helps to re-balance recipes fat and calorie content due to fat-mimicking properties. Increase beta-glucans – Can be used in other drinks, such as oat drinks in order to increase the level of beta-glucans. Prebiotic benefits – PromOat can also be used as a prebiotic fiber. Certificates BRC EU Organic Production Kosher Halal Downloads PromOat Product Leaflet PDF (389 Kb) Download White Paper: Plant-based Innovation with Oats PDF (412 Kb) Download Latest news PromOat news Submit All news, Food Ingredients 09 December 2025 Fi Europe 2025 live: Lantmännen Biorefineries on the push for sustainable oat and wheat ingredients Elena Damas, key account manager at Lantmännen Biorefineries, discusses the latest in oat- and wheat-based ingredients, shifting demand for oat protein and beta-glucan, and how the company’s circular ... Biorefineries, Food Ingredients 16 September 2025 Lantmännen joins export delegation to Asia – highlighting quality, health and innovation in food Lantmännen participated in a joint Swedish-Finnish export delegation to Japan and South Korea in early September. The purpose was to present the Swedish food sector’s strengths – healthy products with... Food Ingredients, PromOat News 09 September 2025 Cookies That Care: PromOat for Cholesterol Reduction Cookies and biscuits are evolving, and consumers are increasingly looking for options that combine indulgence with health benefits. With our updated recipe and application note, it’s easier than ever ... More news Other products and contact PrOatein – Oat protein Avenacare – Oat beta-glucan for cosmetics Contact us Get in touch with us for more information. Find our e-mail and contact form in the link below. To the contact page Lantmännen takes responsibility from field to fork Lantmännen is an agricultural cooperative and Northern Europe’s leader in agriculture, machinery, bioenergy and food products. Owned by 1 8 ,000 Swedish farmers, we have 1 2 ,000 employees and an annual turnover of approximately SEK 70 billion. With research and operations throughout the value chain, we take responsibility from field to fork. Read more about Lantmännen