Oat Beta-glucan Applications Websites Swedish About Lantmännen Lantmännen Lantmännen is an agricultural cooperative and Northern Europe’s leader in agriculture, machinery, bioenergy and food products. Lantmännen Lantmännen Finans Lantmännen Fastigheter Agriculture The Agriculture Sector constitutes Lantmännen's core business and offers products and services to promote strong, competitive farming. Lantmännen Lantbruk Lantmännen Agro Machinery Imports, markets and sells agricultural machinery, spare parts and services. Lantmännen Maskin Energy The Energy Sector is Sweden’s largest producer of bioenergy products. Lantmännen Biorefineries Food The Food Sector develops, processes and markets products that include flour, breakfast foods, pasta, frozen and fresh bread, crispbread and ready-to-eat meals.​ Lantmännen Cerealia Lantmännen Unibake One big family Lantmännen is an agricultural cooperative founded on the deep knowledge our farmers have aquired over generations. We make farming thrive and work together to take responsibility from field to fork. From field to fork From our core farming business,  through the value chain, from field to fork, we are involved in every step from sowing to harvesting; to the food on our tables, feed for our livestock and climate –smart biofuels. Locally and globally Owned by Swedish farmers, Sweden is our base with the Baltic Sea area as our expanded domestic market. We have a strong international presence, and no matter which country and location we operate in, we always take the same responsibility. Research for the future We pursue research and invest in innovation for tomorrow’s agriculture, bioenergy and foods of the future. Innovations are crucial if we are to resolve the challenges of today and tomorrow, which is why Lantmännen also has its own research foundation. Look for the sprout You´ll find the Lantmännen sprout on our packaging. The products may be different, but everyone can feel safe that we also minimise impact on climate and people. If you find the sprout on a packet, you can be sure what’s inside is Good Food from Lantmännen. Biofuels Biofuels Lantmännen Biorefineries operates northern Europe's largest biorefinery. Read more Products Lantmannen Biorefineries produces ethanol. Some of it is used as fuel, while others are used for other technical applications such as windshield washer fluid. About Biofuels Our ethanol has perhaps the best climate performance in the world. In our plant, we can produce both grain-based ethanol and ethanol from second generation raw materials, so-called advanced biofuel. Kontakt Hör gärna av dig om du har frågor om våra produkter eller tjänster. More content Quality and sustainability News Biomaterials Biomaterials Biomaterials producerar produkter som teknisk stärkelse, koldioxid och teknisk etanol. Läs mer om varje produkter, kvalitet- och hållbarhetsarbete nedan. Read more Products Biomaterials produces products such as technical starch, carbon dioxide and technical ethanol. About Biomaterials Read more about each product, quality and sustainability. Kontakt Hör gärna av dig om du har frågor om våra produkter eller tjänster. More content Quality and sustainability News Feed Ingredients Feed Ingredients In our refining process, we seperate protein into destillers' dried grains and solubles. From this we make high-value protein feed that replaces imported soy in a climate-smart way. Läs mer Products Read more about our climate-smart and locally produced feed materials here. About Feed Ingredients The refining process converts cereal starch into ethanol. The protein becomes feed, mostly for cattle, and is returned to Swedish farms. Contact us Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. More content Quality and sustainability News Food Ingredients Food Ingredients Lantmännen Biorefineries develops and markets unique wheat and oat-based ingredients to manufacturers of food, beverages, dietary supplements and cosmetics. Read more Products Lantmännen Biorefineries develops and markets unique wheat and oat-based ingredients to manufacturers of food, beverages, dietary supplements and cosmetics. Applications Read more about the uses of our products and examples of applications. Contact Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. More content Quality and sustainability About Food Ingredients News About us About us Lantmännen Biorefineries is part of Lantmännen's energy division and consists of the production facilities in Lidköping, Norrköping and Kimstad. Läs mer Production facilities We process wheat and oats at our three sites in Norrköping, Lidköping and Kimstad. Job vacancies We continuously seek talented employees for Lantmännen Biorefineries. Learn more about available services and what working at Lantmännen is like. Innovation & Development We use innovation as a driver for a sustainable future. We lead the development of biorefineries and collaborate with universities and other research institutions in several areas. More content Quality and sustainability Contact Contact Please contact us if you have any questions about our products or services. Contact us Contact Food Ingredients Contact Biofuel, Biomaterials or Feed Ingredients News Search Lantmännen Biorefineries • • • Lantmännen Biorefineries Food Ingredients Products Oat beta-glu... PromOat Applications PromOat Oat Beta-Glucan Applications PromOat oat beta-glucan offers a diverse range of applications in food-related products. Read more about the applications and PromOat's functional benefits below. Bakery – Bread, cookies and biscuits PromOat O at beta-glucan offers unique positioning benefits and attractive labelling options in cookies, crackers, muffins, and bread. PromOat is a unique soluble fibre that is neutral in colour, and ideal as a functional ingredient . Its strong water binding properties improve moister and freshness even after freezing and thawing . PromOat gives a clean taste without grittiness and gives access to fibre and health claims. Contact us for application information Plant-based beverages and yoghurt In plant-based dairy alternatives , PromOat Oat beta-glucan can be used alone or as a complement to other hydrocolloids to create a thick texture and deliver a silky creaminess with no grittiness . Using PromOat in your dairy alternatives supports fo am and emulsion stability and contributes to a potential fibre and health claim s . Contact us for application information Beverages PromOat O at beta-glucan is water-soluble and free from graininess or grittiness, ideal for use in smoothies, fruit juices and powdered drinks with health benefits. It increases viscosity, creaminess, and a good mouthfeel. PromOat can contribute to a fibre claim and be used for sugar reduction in juice drinks. It performs very well in mildly acidic and refrigerated applications . Contact us for application information Cereals and bars PromOat O at beta-glucan can give the extra touch to granolas, extruded cereals, and porridges. It has a natural fit with oat-based cereals but also works very well in other types of breakfast products or bars. PromOat easily supplements oats to provide enough beta- glucan for heart health claims and can contribute to a fibre claim too. It does not inhibit expansion of extruded cereal pieces and has a clean taste. Contact us for application information Meat analogues PromOat Oat beta-glucan is a soluble oat fibre that can be used in meat analogue. Especially in combination with other hydrocolloids , PromOat enhances your products th rough stabilis ing emulsions, bind ing water and oil , binding the system, and maintaining a stable shape at refrigerated temperatures. Additionally, incorporating PromOat in meat analogues can support a potential fibre claim. Contact us for application information Food supplements PromOat Oat beta-glucan is ideal to use in dietary supplements, for heart health, weight management and as a texturizer to replace other gums . PromOat has good solubility , adds thickness and a creamy mouthfeel, as well as a clean taste with no gritti ness. Using PromOat in your nutrition or health supplements also contributes to potential health and nutrition claims. Contact us for application information Pasta Using PromOat Oat beta-glucan in pasta can contribute to health or nutrition claims. At the same time, there is no effect on cooking time, production process , yield, or the machinability of semolina flour. Minimal formulation changes are needed for high inclusion rates . It is even possible to replace egg with PromOat in pasta. Contact us for application information Cream cheese PromOat O at beta-glucan can be used as a thickener and emulsion stabili s er in cream cheese. It can also be used to produce cream cheese with lower fat content without compromising the spreadability , creaminess or flavour of the end product . Contact us for application information Ice cream PromOat O at beta-glucan is soluble beta - glucan that can be included in the formulation of ice creams providing with a smooth texture. It can also be used to replace emulsifiers in ice cream, providing with better eating characteristics than other emulsifying substitutes. Including PromOat in the ice cream formulation also improves the heat shock resistance and melting characteristics. PromOat can be used in low fat ice creams to create a creamier and more cohesive product with a longer texture. Contact us for application information Mayonnaise PromOat O at beta-glucan can be used as a in soups, sauces, and dressings as a texturizer, providing with thickness, creaminess , a good mouthfeel, and a clean taste , without grittiness . PromOa t can be used as a substitute for other thickeners and stabili s ers or in combination with them. With the help of PromOat it is possible to access fibre and health claims in your soups, sauces, or dressings . T o the right you can see a video of PromOat stabilising emulsion and replacing fat, providing with a low-fat mayonnaise. Contact us for application information Cosmetic products PromOat O at beta-glucan can be added to cosmetic products in order to thicken them and stabilise emulsions. It is a soluble beta-glucan that provides a smooth texture without graininess . It can be used in combination with Avenacare - Beta-glucan of smaller molecular weight, for soothing and moisturizing the skin, reducing appearance of redness, in sun protection products, or reducing the visible signs of aging. Contact us for application information Contact us for more information